=========================================
File: chi phí dự án AI Branding.pdf
=========================================
Đây là biểu đồ tổng quan cho chi phí sử dụng API key của google. Vì các chức năng hiện tại sẽ
chủ yếu xoanh quanh việc tạo ảnh nên chi phí này sẽ là chi phí duy nhất. Các phần liên quan
đến tạo video và voice sẽ được sử dụng API key của Heygen và ElevenLabs.
Chi phí hiện tại của dự án là ~21.000Đ trong cả quả trình tính đến ngày 04/06
Hiện tại chi phí sử dụng API cho dự án đã khá tối ưu. Các API key của heygen và elevenlabs
hiện tại đều đang là api miễn phí và đang chưa add credit nên sẽ ko tính vào phí hoạt động.
Hiện tại muốn giảm thiểu chi phí cho dự án có thể thêm các model giá rẻ thay vì chỉ dùng
gemini 3.1 flash. Có thể sử dụng bản 2.5 với điều kiện ảnh chất lượng và prompt cũng sẽ chưa
được chuẩn bẳng 3.1 flash

-- 1 of 2 --



-- 2 of 2 --



=========================================
File: Quy Trình Sản Xuất Video_ Công Thức Tinh Gọn Cho Startup & MMO.pdf
=========================================
Written by:
 Linda Burstyn • Pam Cunningham • Hillary Jordan • Kym Spring
Design:
 
Looking • Paul Soady
The Film Foundation presents:
A Guide for Young Filmmakers
MAKING
MOVIES
013322
	013322
The production of this manual was made possible by the generous support of the
DIRECTORS GUILD OF AMERICA
A special thanks to the
ROBLEE FOUNDATION

-- 1 of 134 --

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
A Word from Your Sponsor. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Preface: What Is a Movie? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Chapter 1: Storytelling
Making Movies Is about Telling a
Story...Visually . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Words or No Words . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Words, Words, Words. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Making It Better: with Problems . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Tips from the Experts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Chapter 2: From Story to Screenplay
Scriptwriting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
What’s Your Story? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Writing Your Screenplay, Finally! . . . . . . . . . . 26
Tips from the Experts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Sample Screenplay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
Note to the Director . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Moviemaking Roles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Chapter 3: Directing
Getting the Picture: Directing . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Creating a Storyboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Checking Your Shots...Beforehand. . . . . . . . . 49
Working with Actors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
Directing Tips from the Experts . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Chapter 4: Production Cast and Crew
Art Production. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Acting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Costumes and Makeup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Explore: Continuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Other Important Responsibilities/Jobs . . . . . 66
The Camera . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
Lighting: a Bright Subject . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Sound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
Chapter 5: Editing
Putting the Puzzle Together . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
Explore: Creating an Editing Storyboard . . . . 94
Technical Aspects of Video Editing . . . . . . . . 97
Chapter 6: Making Your Movie
Your Production Schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
Note to the Director: A Word
about Continuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
Production! Shooting Your Movie. . . . . . . . . 108
The Editing Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
Forms and Contracts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
Epilogue: Looking Back . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
Glossary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
Directors Guild of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
The Film Foundation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
Roll Credits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
Table of Contents

-- 2 of 134 --

1
This manual will help you make a movie.
It is written like a basic recipe for chocolate; it
gives you the basic ingredients and lays out the
process. Whether you make fudge or M & M’s is
your challenge. As a filmmaker, you also have a
challenge: to tell your story with your vision,
using your creativity and intelligence. Whether
you are ambitiously learning how to make a
movie on your own, or working with others in a
moviemaking group or class, enjoy. Enjoy the
flexibility and discover the fantastic foibles of
filmmaking.
This guide explains the basics of making a
low-budget, student film. It’s a big contrast to
Hollywood, but the talents and skills needed to
make a good film are the same.
In Hollywood, hundreds of people often
work on a single film. You might work together
with just eight friends but the process remains
the same.
On a big Hollywood production, there are
many specific jobs. If you watch the credits at the
end of a major movie, you will see that there is a
director (who is in charge of the entire movie),
actors, at least one writer, a cinematographer, a
producer, an executive producer, an associate
producer, editors, art directors, and sound-effects
people. One person operates the camera, one
person is in charge of moving the camera, and
still another might be in charge of making sure
nothing gets in the way of the camera. There are
also dialogue coaches, stunt coordinators, grips
and gaffers, makeup artists, assistant makeup
artists, costume specialists, and assistant
costume specialists. These are just a few of those
involved in a big Hollywood movie.
Fortunately, you do not need all these
people to make a film. In making a short film,
each person has a special role to play, and each
will probably have multiple jobs in order to
accomplish all the aspects of film production.
This guide introduces these different
components.
• Everyone has something special to offer
in making a movie.
• This is about learning, having fun, and
exploring your creativity.
Just like athletes must practice to build
their strength, coordination and skill, this
manual offers experiments, or explorations to
work your moviemaking muscles. Some might
be as boring as lifting weights. Others might be
as fun as a pick-up game of basketball. Together,
they will help give you the skills and experiences
needed to direct and make a movie. You have to
provide the creativity.
Introduction
Dr. Seuss’ How the Grinch Stole Christmas
The Grinch (Jim Carrey) conspires with his dog
Max to deprive the Who’s of their favorite holiday.
Copyright ©2001 Universal City Studios, Inc.
Courtesy of Universal Studios Publishing Rights,
a Division of Universal Studios Licensing, Inc.
All Rights Reserved.
The Mask of Zorro
Copyright ©1998 Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc.
All Rights Reserved.
Photo: Ron Batzdorff

-- 3 of 134 --

2
Do you like going to the movies?
Did you ever want to create a movie
of your own?
Maybe you like working with cameras and lights. Perhaps
designs, colors and costumes fascinate you. Maybe you like to
compose and perform music. The film industry includes people with
all kinds of talents and interests—from directors, actors, writers and
cinematographers to art directors and sound engineers. In fact, film is
the only creative process where people from many different
backgrounds work together to produce a single work of art…called the
director’s vision.
Now imagine this: The film you created—or helped to create—is
deteriorating. The moving images are fading to black. The soundtrack
is distorted. With each passing year, the chemicals on the film tape
decay a little bit more until one day the film is simply no longer there.
Once a film self-destructs, no one can ever view it again.
How would you feel if all your hard work and creativity had
disintegrated to dust?
What is film preservation and why does it matter?
Hundreds of movies made in the 20th century—the first century
ever to use moving image technology—have already self-destructed.
A Word from Your Sponsor
“So what?” you might ask. So what if 50 % of the movies made
before 1950 are lost. What does it matter if a movie made in the year
you were born has begun to fade? Movies are just entertainment,
after all, aren’t they?
Many people—both filmmakers and movie-goers alike—would
not agree. Movies matter—and here’s why.
Some movies record history, capturing current events and
community and family traditions. With moving image technology,
we can hear and see Reverend King deliver his “I have a dream . . .”
speech on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial in our nation’s capitol.
We can watch Neil Armstrong take humankind’s first step on
the moon.
Other movies reflect history. These movies comment on
current events and traditions. For example, in TO KILL A
MOCKINGBIRD (1962, dir. Robert Mulligan), Gregory Peck portrays
an Alabama lawyer in the 1930s. He argues his case in a segregated
courtroom where African Americans must—by law—sit in the
balcony.
Some movies imagine the future. In THE DAY THE EARTH
STOOD STILL (1951, dir. Robert Wise), movie-goers of 1950s
watched in awe as a flying saucer landed on Earth. The alien had
come with a warning: If Earthings did not end war and learn to solve
their differences peacefully, they would face total destruction.

-- 4 of 134 --

3
Movies matter because they are more than images and sounds.
They are stories. The stories movies tell have a value beyond making us
laugh or cry or hold our breath in suspense. They provide clues to
understanding who we are . . . or were. Movies mirror our hopes and
fears, our achievements and failures. Like a painting, a symphony or a
novel, movies an important source of artistic and cultural information
about our country.
Movies matter, also, because they can be great teachers. Think
about it. How does a young artist learn to paint or sculpt? By studying
the works of the great masters. Likewise, musicians might study
Beethoven or the Beatles. To learn their craft and seek inspiration,
young writers may read Shakespeare, Austin, or even Harry Potter’s
creator, J. K. Rowling.
But, if the great films of the past are lost (as many already are)
who will the young filmmakers of tomorrow study?
Because movies matter, the United States Congress passed in
1998 the National Film Preservation Act. Preservation means to
protect films from deterioration as well as to restore decaying film
before images and sounds are lost forever.
Because movies matter, some of the most famous directors in the
film industry created The Film Foundation. The foundation’s goal is to
increase awareness of this country’s film heritage and to preserve as
many films as we can. The first step in saving movies is understanding
that movies are more than entertainment.
The Film Foundation created this manual for you. We created
this manual because we believe:
n 	viewing and/or making movies can be an exciting and
creative learning experience for all youth;
n 	understanding the decisions, hard work, and passion
required to make a movie will help you better understand
why films are worth saving.
Get ready. The pages inside this manual are filled with all
kinds of creative activities. Some will challenge your critical thinking
skills. Some will inspire you to communicate with others as you
never have before—using images and sound as well as words.
Whether a movie-goer or a future filmmaker, you can be sure that
the movies that matter to you, matter to us all.

-- 5 of 134 --

4
Like books, movies tell a story. But instead
of words on paper, movies are a visual and a
listening experience. The audience sees and
hears the story. People all over the world love this
powerful medium — they love the way movies
tell stories.
The storyteller is the director. He/she is in
charge of how a story is made into a film. Exactly
where and how the images are filmed and edited,
how the actors portray their characters, and what
the audience experiences, is all part of the
director’s vision. The story itself can be simple or
complex, silly or intense. The director’s vision is
responsible for how the movie makes the
audience feel about the story: sad, amused,
bored, exhilarated, scared, powerful, or humble.
Stories in books can describe any place in
the universe, with any number of characters. But
there are constraints in filmmaking. Film
directors can be limited by the weather, number
of actors, available space, and, especially, the
money needed for props, costumes, special
lighting, sound and camera equipment. So, a lot
of creative problem-solving comes into play.
It is the director’s challenge to make his or
her vision translate from story to movie, using
the techniques of filmmaking — things like
character development, camera angles, and
editing. But you have to develop your own
vision and probably the best way is to create (or
help create) a film from beginning to end. By
doing so, you will learn how to:
• develop a story and interesting characters
• write the story in the language of
filmmakers: a screenplay
• create a visual storyboard to show camera
angles, distance, and subjects
• plan a filming schedule
• utilize various camera, sound, and lighting
techniques
• work with actors
• understand the power of art direction and
continuity
• use costumes and makeup
• do post-production sound and editing
Preface: What Is a Movie?
The word “movie” comes from the term “motion
picture” — pictures that move.
These components are presented in this manual
for you to learn, practice, and adapt to fit your
own vision. Throughout this manual, movies will
be recommended as prime examples of different
techniques and film accomplishments. Don’t
worry if you can’t see every movie. You can
observe and analyze the concepts in many films.
Beetlejuice
Barbara and Adam Maitland (Geena Davis and
Alec Baldwin) change their minds about using
the skills of demonic “freelance bio-exorcist”
Betelgeuse (Michael Keaton) when he shows
them his scary stuff.
Copyright ©1988 The Geffen Film Company
All Rights Reserved.
Mrs. Doubtfire
Robin Williams is Mrs. Doubtfire.
Copyright ©1993 Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation
All Rights Reserved.
Photo: Phil Bray

-- 6 of 134 --

Storytelling
“ The learning process is never over. Every new work creates new sets of problems that
need immediate answers. And there are certain answers you can only find in the
works of the great masters…To find your own voice doesn’t mean you have to be deaf
to other voices. Sometimes they work as an echo, other times like a series of traffic
signs that, if right, will guide you to create a work that will touch other people.”
— Martin Scorsese
Director, The Age of Innocence
• Making Movies Is about Telling a Story...Visually
• Words or No Words
• Words, Words, Words
• Making it Better: with Problems
• Tips from the Experts
1
Chapter

-- 7 of 134 --

This formula may sound basic, but huge
numbers of excellent movies have used it.
The power of a film comes more from how
the story is told.
You can read more about this formula in The
Writer’s Journey by Christopher Vogler.
Telling a story in a movie differs from using
words to write a story. This chapter will tell you
about those differences and give you exercises
to help you become a better storyteller…
and moviemaker.
5
Almost every movie tells a story and the better
you are at storytelling, the better you will be at
moviemaking.
One of the classic ways to tell a story is to
follow this simple story formula:
• There is a hero.
• Hero faces a scary or difficult adventure or
problem. He/she is trying to accomplish
something.
• Hero eventually overcomes his/her fear and
goes on the adventure.
• Hero faces serious obstacles.
• Hero solves his/her problems, and
overcomes the obstacles.
• Hero reaches his/her goal and learns a lot
along the way.
STORYTELLING
Making movies is about telling a story...visually
A Movie to Watch
Star Wars: A New Hope,
directed by
George Lucas.
This, the first of the
Star Wars movies, really
follows a hero’s journey.
By combining a simple story
with special visual effects,
Lucas created an epic film.
Watch it to see how well it follows
the story formula.

-- 8 of 134 --

6
WORDS OR NO WORDS
This dialogue would be silly, and funny
instead of scary.
In filmmaking, the storytellers decide if the
feeling expressed to the audience would be
communicated better without using words.
In our daily lives, we experience non-verbal
(no words) communication all the time. Think
about when your mother, or father, or best
friend gets mad at you. Sometimes the way
they look at you, or the things they do like
ignoring you or turning their back on you can
be more hurtful than anything they might say.
How can you tell people how you are feeling
without using words?
List three ways you can communicate your
feelings non-verbally:
1
2
3
Sometimes, movies don’t use words to tell the story.
Have you ever been around someone who is
speaking a foreign language? Could you tell
something about what they were saying just
from their tone of voice, gestures, and
emotions? People can communicate without
saying, or understanding words. Many times,
you see the true character “underneath” the
words. Actors work hard to show the audience
the true nature of their characters, using more
than just words.
Can you tell by someone’s body language if
they are surprised? How can you tell?
Describe what someone might do with their
face, or other body parts, to convince an
audience they are really:
grossed out by a cockroach.
disappointed by a bad grade on a test.
shocked to hear an old lady swear.
Watching a movie is a visual experience.
Much of the story is shown to the viewer
without using any words. Think about a
movie that opens with a car chase, or a dog’s
view of the sidewalk as it is being walked.
No words are used (in movies, the words are
called dialogue), only visual images and
sounds: cars crashing, the jingle of a dog
leash, or sometimes, just music.
Imagine a scene in a horror film where a
monster sneaks up on his victim, ready to
pounce, and, at the last minute, the victim
turns around and screams. Again, there is
no dialogue; the director wants the audience
to see the action, to feel more captivated
and scared.
Now, imagine the opposite:
Monster “I am now approaching my victim,
ready to pounce.”
Victim “And here I am, completely unaware of
what’s about to happen.”
Monster “Here I go, about to jump!”
Victim “I think I sense something coming
towards me…uh-oh!”

-- 9 of 134 --

7
After you do this exercise, record some of your thoughts:
It was easy to act
because
It was hard to guess that my friend was trying to act
because
I had an easy time guessing that my friend had picked
because
EXPLORE:
acting without words
You need at least one other person
for this exploration. It’s a little like
charades. Write down as many
emotions as you can think of, like
sadness, pleasure, anger, fear,
surprise, embarrassment, and shyness
on individual slips of paper. Fold up
the pieces of paper and put them in
a hat or a bowl. One person picks a
piece of paper and acts out the
emotion without saying a word. The
other person(s) guesses the emotion.
However, some emotions are pretty
hard to act out.
^

-- 10 of 134 --

8
Pick one movie where the emotion of a character was communicated very effectively
without dialogue:
Movie:
Name of character:
Give an example of how the director and actor revealed the character’s emotion in a
particularly powerful scene:
How did the music or other sound communicate the way the character was feeling?
Did you think about whether the director decided to use a particular angle of the camera,
or if the lighting helped communicate emotions?
Ideas:
EXPLORE:
How do directors convey
the feelings of the characters
without using dialogue?
Compare two movies. Look for
techniques like the angle and
distance of the camera, the actor’s
body language, the sound effects,
and lighting techniques.
^

-- 11 of 134 --

9
Now choose the opposite — a scene in a movie that did a poor job of expressing feeling.
Movie:
Name of character:
How was this character’s emotion shown?
Obviously, it often makes sense for characters to talk. But it is important to
realize that in film, dialogue is just one technique used to convey the movie’s
story. Filmmakers-in-training should experiment with all the techniques
introduced in this guide.
A Movie to Watch
Black Stallion,
directed by
Carroll Ballard.
This is a great movie
that tells a dramatic
story without a lot of
dialogue. You should also
watch a silent movie, like
The Kid, directed by Charlie
Chaplin. Made in 1921, it is a
wonderful example of how
moviemakers were able to tell
stories even before they knew how
to make sound in movies.

-- 12 of 134 --

10
WORDS, WORDS, WORDS
Movies usually include dialogue to help tell the story.
Take a field trip for this exploration.
Go to a public place, like a restaurant or a
mall, and observe the different ways people
communicate. Pay attention to the
conversations around you. Notice the types of
words, accents, phrases, and topics discussed,
and how the people interact when
communicating back and forth. Do they pause
a lot? Do they talk really fast? Does the person
they are talking to seem to understand them
better than you?
Public place:
“Characters”:
Amusing phrases or words:
Strange phrases or words:
Other observations:
You may want to keep notes about other
interesting people you observe, to give you
ideas later for developing the characters in
your film.
In order to make a movie, you will probably
tell your story using action without dialogue,
as well as with dialogue. It is important to
understand how to express parts of the story
using only action and images, and to practice
writing dialogue. There are no rules, but the
films that many people respond to use
dialogue that seems real — how a real person
would talk.
EXPLORE:
how real people talk
How do people talk to each other?
How do people look as they are
listening to someone?
How do people combine words,
expressions, and other types of body
language during conversation?
^

-- 13 of 134 --

DEMAUNE: Good thing we caught the bus.
CHRISTINA:
11
EXPLORE:
Write a conversation
The characters are Demaune and
Christina, and they are your age.
Here is the scene: Demaune and
Christina barely made it on the
school bus, and had to sit together.
Both are embarrassed. They like
each other, but neither one wants
the other to know. Christina is
wondering if Demaune knows
about Renee’s party this weekend,
but she does not know how to ask
him. In the first line, Demaune says:
“Good thing we caught the bus.”
• When writing dialogue, think about how
people really speak.
• You do not want the characters to sound
like they are giving a speech.
• Have them talk the way you know people
talk. If they speak in slang, use it.
^
o • Be sure to read the dialogue out loud.
• Listen to how it sounds. If it sounds
natural, keep it.
• If it sounds strange, or forced, rewrite it.
Tips from the Experts

-- 14 of 134 --

12
MAKING IT BETTER:
WITH PROBLEMS
Some stories are great. As you are reading or
watching them, you cannot wait to find out
what happens next. Other stories are boring,
and put you to sleep. How do you tell a story
to make it exciting?
Storytellers often make their stories more
interesting by adding conflict. The conflict can
be a battle or a contest of some kind.
Sometimes, conflict is created when one
person wants to do something, and someone
else is trying to stop him or her from doing it.
Conflict can also come from within the
character. For example, a woman wants a raise
in salary. She totally deserves the raise, but she
is insecure and afraid to ask her boss. The
conflict here comes from within the woman
— from her own fear.
What is one of your favorite movies?
Who was the hero of that movie?
EXPLORE:
the use of obstacles
Do obstacles really make stories more
exciting? Think about and answer these
questions:
Did the hero face an obstacle? What was it?
How did the hero overcome the obstacle?
^
Question: How can you make a story more
interesting, more dramatic?
Answer: Create an obstacle — create conflict,
create a problem.
Obstacles are more dramatic if they are alive.
Climbing a mountain can be an obstacle, but
it might be more dramatic if someone tries to
prevent you from climbing to the top.

-- 15 of 134 --

13
Character Barry, age 15, has decided he has to quit hanging out with his friends, because they
have started committing hate crimes against gays, African Americans, and Asians.
Obstacles:
Character Shartelle, age 24, wants to move from New York City to her aunt’s farm in Northern
Michigan. She is trying to break away from a life of using drugs and get her life back together.
Obstacles:
Character Quintin, age 19, wants to follow his passion to become a biologist and help save
endangered species. But his mother, a single parent, thinks making money is the most
important priority, and will not pay for his college unless he goes to Business School.
Obstacles:
Character Juan, age 13, has grown up in Kansas and he’s never left the state. He wants more
than anything to go mountain climbing. By helping his dad with his business, collecting old
tires to be recycled, he has saved enough money for a plane ticket.
Obstacles:
EXPLORE:
creating obstacles
Below are four characters. You create
the obstacles/conflict for each one.
Try to give them human obstacles…
someone who wants the opposite of
what Barry, Shartelle, Quintin, and
Juan want.
A Movie to Watch
Titanic, directed by
James Cameron.
The main character,
Rose, has several
conflicts — her
relationship with her
ill-suited fiancée, the
expectations of her
mother and wealthy social
group, not to mention, trying to
survive the sinking of the Titanic.
This movie is an excellent example
of how conflicts and obstacles can
intertwine.
^

-- 16 of 134 --

14
(or monster or animal) trying to block
the hero. The audience might even
like both of them.
• Stories can be exciting when both
sides have a good argument and it is
hard for the audience to decide who is
right.
• There should be plenty of surprises.
Notes:
• Stories are most interesting when the
characters have big decisions to make,
and when the audience knows that
making the wrong decision would be a
real disaster.
• Stories are most dramatic when the
conflicts are intense and require the
hero to make hard decisions.
• The audience should understand the
goals of both the hero and the person
A Movie to Watch
The Truman Show,
directed by
Peter Weir.
This is an original
story of Truman
Burbank, a man whose
life is nationally
televised, unbeknownst
to him. Truman slowly uncovers
that all the people in his life are
“actors,” and his reality, as he knows
it, doesn’t actually exist. It’s a
wonderful film with heartwarming
scenes, clever dialogue, and a fresh
and innovative plot.
A must see!
oTips from the Experts

-- 17 of 134 --

From Story
to Screenplay
“Write, write, write, and write again.”
— Spike Lee
Director, Do The Right Thing
• Scriptwriting
• What’s Your Story?
• Writing Your Screenplay, Finally!
• Tips from the Experts
• Sample Screenplay
• Note to the Director
• Moviemaking Roles
2
Chapter

-- 18 of 134 --

15
SCRIPTWRITING
SCRIPT EXAMPLE: Half Naked
Two guys are standing in an empty, school hallway, wearing
nothing but underwear. They have been pushed out of the
gym locker room. Delmont tries to get back in, but the door
is locked; they are totally freaked out.
DELMONT: 	Oh my God!
ARTURO: 	What are we going to do?
Delmont looks down the hall, to the left, then to the right.
The doors are all closed, and no one else is in the hallway.
DELMONT: 	I hate my life. I guess we should…
What happens next?
You decide. Practice writing a short movie script for Half Naked.
You have the starting plot of the story — you continue it, and include:
1 a short description of each scene.
2 where the action takes place.
3 what happens in the scene to make the story interesting.
There is a critical step in taking a story idea and making it into a movie.
It is a particular format that goes by two names — screenplay or script.
All movies need a script. In a screenplay, the dialogue is written a
particular way, and descriptions of settings and action are abbreviated.

-- 19 of 134 --

16
Write your screenplay on the following two pages:
A few challenges
for this exercise:
• Keep the screenplay short — just
two pages.
• Use dialogue and description of
action without dialogue.
• There should be a beginning, a
middle, and an end.
• All the scenes of the movie take
place in one location — at the
school.
• The story takes place over the
course of one day.
• By the way, are the guys wearing
boxers or briefs?

-- 20 of 134 --

17

-- 21 of 134 --

WHAT’S YOUR STORY?
Write down four interesting things that
have happened to you:
Funniest:
Scariest or Weirdest:
Most thrilling:
Biggest conflict/problem that you have faced:
The work you have done in the previous
sections were stepping-stones on the path to
writing your story, and ultimately, making
your own film. To write a good screenplay for
film, you need to:
1 decide the story you want to tell.
2 develop interesting characters for that story.
1. Coming Up with a Great Story Idea
Use your creative abilities to generate a list
of possible story ideas. The next exercises
should help you start thinking about some
ideas.
3 create obstacles and interesting solutions
to the problems that your characters face.
4 write your idea in outline form.
5 expand your outline into a screenplay.
18
Can you think of two interesting things that
have happened to someone in your family, to a
friend, or someone in your neighborhood?
1.
2.

-- 22 of 134 --

19
George Lucas, the man who directed
and wrote Star Wars, has said in
interviews that he came up with
the idea for that movie because, as
a kid, he loved Flash Gordon, a TV
show about space. What is your
favorite TV show?
Can you create a story idea for a
movie, based on your favorite TV
show?
TV show:
Story Idea:
Congratulations, you have a story.
Now you need an outline. Why make an
outline? Two reasons:
• It will help you think about the story in a
format that is easier to make into a movie.
• An outline is easy to expand into a
screenplay.
Story Idea:
The next two sections give ideas and
exercises for developing interesting
characters and designing obstacles.
Choose your best idea.
Re-read all your ideas. Choose the idea that
fits in all these categories:
• You like the idea.
• It seems like one that you could make into a
movie using locations near your house or
school.
• You can make it work with the number of
actors you can count on being in your
movie.
• You can tell the story in a 5-10 minute movie.
• Remember, this is going to be the basis for
your movie, so pick an idea you really like.

-- 23 of 134 --

20
She loves movies and wants to be an
actress. Once, she watched for three
hours while a movie was being shot on
her street. She saw Danny Glover, and
was impressed with all the film
equipment, and how much fun everyone
seemed to be having on the hectic set.
Jimmy and Patrice are Natasha’s only
friends. None of them are popular.
Patrice, the wild one, likes to get them in
trouble. Jimmy is quiet, like Natasha, and
both of them secretly enjoy the attention
they get from hanging out with the
outrageous Patrice.
Natasha is attractive, in a subtle way.
There is something about her that seems
special — a quiet intelligence. While she
does not think of herself as very smart,
she knows she has a talent for spelling.
Unlike most people her age, she likes
blues and jazz — the kinds of music
played at the barbershop.
Character sketch
After you identify your characters and your plot
(the major event in the story), create details to
make your characters more interesting.
Write a character sketch describing your
character. Include information about his/her:
• childhood
• favorite foods
• clothes
• relationships with friends and family
• major problems he/she faces in life
• things she/he loves
• music she/he listens to
Here is a short character sketch from a non-
existent movie. The movie is about a girl who
tries to win a spelling contest.
Natasha Lake is a fifteen-year-old, African-
American, high school sophomore. She
grew up in South Central, Los Angeles.
Her parents own and run a barbershop
near their home. Natasha helps out in the
barbershop, sweeping the floor and
running the cash register. She is shy, and
has spent most of her life listening to
other people — especially men getting
their hair cut.
2. Developing Your Characters
A Movie to Watch
Tootsie, directed by
Sydney Pollack.
A successful, well
written, entertaining
comedy full of
interesting characters.
As you watch this movie,
ask yourself:
Are you wondering what’s
going to happen next?
How do you think the director is
able to accomplish that?
Is it funny?
What makes it funny?
The film has wonderful
performances by the entire cast.
Tootsie
Copyright ©1982 Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc.
All Rights Reserved.
Courtesy of Columbia Pictures.

-- 24 of 134 --

21
Name: 	Age:
What are some of your hero’s personality traits? (Funny, irritating, a
troublemaker, athletic, easily embarrassed, gentle, angry, not very smart…)
Write down as much as you can:
Describe the home life of your main character.
Does he or she live with parents, a roommate, a dog, brothers or sisters, alone?
Who are his or her best friends? What are they like?
Write a character sketch of your main
character. Remember, you are making
it all up, but the more you develop
your character, the easier it will be to
write good dialogue, so the words that
come out of his or her mouth can
sound natural.
Your character sketch

-- 25 of 134 --

22
3. Creating Obstacles and Interesting Solutions to
the Problems That Your Characters Face
What problems/obstacles stand in the way of your main character (also known as the
protagonist) from achieving a goal?
1.
2.
3.
How does your protagonist handle these obstacles? Write two possible solutions.
1.
2.
What kinds of problems occur because of the solutions your protagonist tries?
How does everything end? How does the main problem get solved?
This is the middle part or plot of your
screenplay. Come up with at least one
conflict —unexpected things that go
wrong and get in your protagonist’s
way. Be clever. Keep your audience
guessing.
Think of unique ways your protagonist
will deal with the problems he or she
encounters. You want the audience to
root for your protagonist…or at least
care about what happens.
Does your protagonist succeed or fail?
This is the end of your story. Make it
memorable. Obviously, not every story
has a happy ending, although many
movies made in Hollywood do.

-- 26 of 134 --

23
Movie: Home Alone, directed
by Chris Columbus
The story idea is:
A young boy must save his home from
burglars when he’s left alone during vacation.
Is it a comedy, adventure, drama, romance,
or horror movie?
Comedy
Where does the movie take place?
The family’s house, mainly. Also, at the airport
and a grocery store.
Who is the hero?
Kevin, a resourceful, smart and mature-like
8-year old
What does the protagonist want?
Kevin wants to prevent the burglars from
robbing his house.
Who are the other characters? Are they the
hero’s friends or his opponents?
Harry, a bungling burglar 	Opponent
Marv, Harry’s dumb partner 	Opponent
Kate, Kevin’s mother 	Friend
4. Story Outline
What exciting thing (the “hook”) happens at
the beginning of the story? What gets the
audience interested?
The family leaves for vacation and forgets
Kevin.
Who or what gets in the hero’s way?
Harry and Marv, the burglars
What problems stand in the way of your hero
getting what he/she wants?
• Kevin needs to get food and money without
his parents.
• Burglars break into Kevin’s house.
• Kevin needs his family.
What solutions does your hero come up with?
• Kevin first scares away the burglars with a
BB gun.
• Then Kevin rigs his house with
contraptions, scaring away the burglars.
How does everything get resolved?
Kevin succeeds in foiling the burglars. His
family comes home.
Does your hero learn anything?
Kevin learns to appreciate his family.
Here is an example of a story outline
from a real movie. It pulls the story
ideas together and keeps it simple.
Use it as a guide for your own outline.

-- 27 of 134 --

24
Where does the movie take place?
Who is your hero or your main character?
What is the goal of your hero?
Who are the other characters important to the story? Are they the protagonist’s
(hero’s) friends or enemies?
1.
2.
3.
You should try and pick only one
location. You want to spend your time
shooting, not moving around from
location to location. Keep it simple and
realistic. Try to avoid things like major
battle scenes.
Your hero can be good or evil, female,
male, child, adult, animal, or alien.
This is the goal your main character
will try to accomplish by the end of
the movie.
Now it’s time to outline your story.

-- 28 of 134 --

25
Do you have a plan to “hook” your audience?
Who or what gets in the hero’s way?
What problems stand in the way of your hero getting what he/she wants?
What solutions does your hero come up with?
How does everything get resolved?
Does your hero learn anything that teaches something to the audience?
This is the beginning of your story.
It starts on the first page of your
script. The exciting thing that
happens is the hook. It sets the tone
for the entire movie.

-- 29 of 134 --

26
WRITING YOUR SCREENPLAY,
FINALLY!
You have your idea. You have a good sense of
the characters in your story. You have an
outline. So, you are just about ready to start
writing your screenplay. But first, you’ll need
to know the format, some special language,
and abbreviations.
A short film screenplay is about nine or ten
pages long. It will be written and re-written,
because as you proceed in the filmmaking
process, you will be changing and adapting
the screenplay based on the obstacles you
encounter and the things you discover.
Try and break it into sections:
Page 1: 	The Set-up (where the audience
learns what the hero wants). This is
the beginning, with a good hook.
Pages 2-7: The Middle (who or what opposes
the main character and why).
The problems the hero has to
overcome.
Pages 8-9:The Ending (where the problems
are resolved). The protagonist either
wins or loses.
Scenes
Screenplays are written scene by scene.
A scene is a part of the story that happens in
one place over one period of time.
For example, if a movie starts out with a guy
getting ready for work in the morning, there
might be three separate scenes:
Scene 1. brushing his teeth in the bathroom
Scene 2. getting dressed in his bedroom
Scene 3. eating breakfast in the kitchen
Every time the location or the time changes, it is
considered a new scene.
Each scene should lead naturally into the
next one, and keep the audience guessing
about what will happen next. In written form,
a scene can be any length, from a couple of
lines to a page, or even longer.
“ Whether it be a lyric, a novel or a
screenplay, what separates the
professional from the amateur is
not so much the ability to write,
as the ability to rewrite.”
—Alan and Marilyn Bergman
Lyricists, The Way We Were

-- 30 of 134 --

27
Parts of a Screenplay
• The elements that make up the
screenplay are:
• Slug Line – when and where
the scene is taking place
• Action – what is happening
• Characters and Description –
who is in the scene
• Dialogue – what the characters
are saying
• How the characters say their
lines 	This slug line means:
• EXT. is an abbreviation for EXTERIOR,
which means outside.
If it were an inside shot, it would say INT.,
short for INTERIOR.
• The next part of the slug line gets more
specific about the location of the scene; in
this case, a DESERT CLEARING—a big,
empty place in the desert.
• The final part of the slug line tells you when
the scene will take place— in this case, at
NIGHT.
Slug Line
The first part of a screenplay is called the
slug line.
A slug line lets everyone know where and when
the scene is supposed to take place. Every
scene in your screenplay should start with a
slug line.
Following is a slug line from the screenplay
for: Men in Black, directed by Barry
Sonnenfeld:
EXT. DESERT CLEARING - NIGHT
With just four words, the screenwriter gave
the director a lot of important information.
They knew they needed to look for someplace
outside to shoot this scene and the place had
to be, or had to look like, a desert clearing.
Since it takes place at night, they knew they
would need to shoot the scene after dark.
(Shooting outside at night often requires
special lighting and equipment, so if the
director shooting Men in Black could not get
that kind of equipment, they would have to
talk to the writer about changing the scene to
take place during the DAY.)
%
Men in Black
Copyright ©1997 Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc.
All Rights Reserved.
Courtesy of Columbia Pictures.

-- 31 of 134 --

Example:
Plain English: Outside, on a road, at the border of Texas and Mexico, at night.
28
EXT. ROAD - TEXAS/MEXICO BORDER - NIGHT
INT. INTERROGATION ROOM - LATER - NIGHT
INT. INTERROGATION ROOM - LATER -
EXT. MORGUE (SIDE STREET) - DUSK
INT. MIB BUILDING - HEADQUARTERS - DAY
Explore:
deciphering slug lines
Here are a few more examples of slug
lines from Men in Black.
After each line, write down, in plain
English, the information that the slug
line gives you. (A few hints: A morgue
is a place where police sometimes
store dead bodies before they are
buried and MIB BUILDING means
Men in Black Building.)
^

-- 32 of 134 --

29
Action
Another element in a screenplay is the action.
The action comes after the slug line, and it describes the scene (including
the setting, the characters, and what is happening) in greater detail.
The action should be no longer than a few sentences. Sometimes there are
lines of action in a screenplay, without a slug line.
Here are a couple of action elements from Men in Black, with their slug lines:
EXT. WORLD’S FAIR - LANDING TOWER - NIGHT
Edgar climbs the outside of the landing tower of one of the
spaceships, pushing Laurel up ahead of him, headed for the
saucer at the top.
INT. GARAGE - DAY
The next morning. A door opens on a garage and an ORKIN
MAN steps inside, carrying a tank of toxic gas. The morning
light spills on an abundance of spiders, crawling everywhere —
big ones, small ones, hundreds of them have moved in and
taken over this dusty place.
The Orkin Man sighs and sets down his tank.
In both cases, the action is described simply and quickly. The trick is to
give just enough detail to get across what is happening, and no more.
A Movie to Watch
Back to the Future,
directed by
Robert Zemeckis.
Pay close attention to
the unique storyline and
how the character changes
his future by traveling into
the past and back.
Back to the Future
Inventor Doc Brown (Christopher Lloyd) and
time traveller Marty McFly (Michael J. Fox)
exchange concerned looks when Marty's future
mother (Lea Thompson) pays them a visit.
Copyright ©2001 Universal City Studios, Inc.
Courtesy of Universal Studios Publishing Rights,
a Division of Universal Studios Licensing, Inc.
All Rights Reserved.

-- 33 of 134 --

30
Characters
The names of new characters are always capitalized in a screenplay. You
should write a simple, brief description. This is how the characters of “Kay”
and “Dee” are introduced in the third scene of the movie:
Once they are identified as KAY and DEE, their names are never capitalized
in the action again. But they are still capitalized in the DIALOGUE.
Using capital letters tells the person reading the screenplay, “Hey, pay
attention, there’s a new character here!”
Sometimes, characters do not have names, but are identified by a short
description instead. Usually it is a minor character, someone who plays a
small part, like the ORKIN MAN, who is in the movie only for a minute
or two.
TWO MEN get out of the car, dressed in plain black suits, crisp
white shirts, simple black ties, shiny black shoes. KAY, fiftyish,
is extremely world-weary; his partner, DEE, mid-sixties, is just
weary.
A Movie to Watch
Dr. Seuss’ How
the Grinch Stole
Christmas,
directed by
Ron Howard.
Can you pick out the
protagonist in the film?
How about the
antagonist?
• Every movie tends to have at least one
main character — or protagonist — and
his or her enemy, called an antagonist.
The protagonist is not necessarily good
or bad, but he or she is the person who
carries the action of the movie forward.
oTips from the Experts The movie is usually the protagonist’s
story.
• For example, the protagonist in Star
Wars is Luke Skywalker.
The antagonist is Darth Vadar.
Dr. Seuss’ How the Grinch Stole Christmas
Little Cindy Lou-Who (Taylor Momsen).
Copyright ©2001 Universal City Studios, Inc.
Courtesy of Universal Studios Publishing Rights,
a Division of Universal Studios Licensing, Inc.
All Rights Reserved.
Photo: Ron Batzdorff

-- 34 of 134 --

oTips from the Experts
31
Dialogue
Dialogue is, of course, what your characters say. Here is more of the
scene, showing how dialogue fits in with the slug lines and the action.
EXT. DESERT CLEARING - NIGHT
Kay and Dee lead their captive into a clearing in the desert brush. Dee pulls
an enormous handgun from a shoulder holster and stays a pace or two off,
covering him. Kay has an arm draped around the man’s shoulders.
KAY
I think you jumped off the bus in the
wrong part of town, amigo. In fact, I’ll
bet dollars to pesos that you’re not…
He pulls out a small laser device, which he ZIPS neatly down the front of
the man’s clothes.
KAY (CONT’D)
…from anywhere near here.
The man’s clothes fall to the ground, revealing what he really is
underneath — A SCALY SPACE DUDE, about four-and-a-half feet tall, with a
snout, snail-like tentacles, and independently moving eyes on stalks at the
top of his head.
Dialogue is always indented, with the name of the character speaking written in
capital letters in the center. There are no quotation marks around the dialogue.
• The beginning part of a
screenplay is called the setup —
that’s where the protagonist and
the problem he or she wants to
overcome is introduced. In a ten-
page screenplay (the kind you
would write for a ten-minute
film), the setup will be on the
very first page or so.
• Putting in lots of twists and turns
(surprises) can make the film
more fun to watch, and it keeps
the audience interested.
• Let other people read your
screenplay to get some feedback.
• Keep re-working scenes and
characters as you get more
familiar with your story. A script
is a work in progress. You will
probably even rewrite dialogue or
include new thoughts while you
are filming your story.

-- 35 of 134 --

32
SAMPLE SCREENPLAY
Game Time by Todd Newman
FADE IN:
EXT. high school soccer field - NIGHT
The field is empty. The lonely sounds of crickets can be heard.
CUT TO:
A man sits alone on the bleachers. His silhouette is dimly lit by the moon. He strikes
a match. The flame invades the darkness and reveals the face of a rugged looking man.
He is EMIL McGILVRAY, mid 30s. He is deep in thought as he lights a cigar and scans
the field with his eyes.
SUDDENLY, JERRY JOSEPH, an elderly night watchman, approaches and shines a
flashlight in Emil’s face.
JERRY
Who the hell are you?
Emil lifts his hand to shield his eyes from the blinding light.
EMIL
I’m sorry. I played soccer here years ago.
I graduated in ‘86.
Jerry takes a step closer.
JERRY
(sarcastically)
Well, good for you. But I didn’t ask for your resume.
I asked who you were.

-- 36 of 134 --

EMIL
My name is Emil McGilvray.
JERRY
It’s two o’clock in the morning. What are you doing here?
Emil puffs his cigar. He takes a deep breath and sighs.
EMIL
I’m not sure.
(beat)
I guess I came here to find my youth.
Jerry chuckles to himself. He turns his flashlight off and puts it in his coat pocket.
JERRY
Let me tell you something kid. You still have your youth.
I’ll be seventy five years old this March. One thing I’ve
learned in my old age is not to dwell on the past.
Thinking about what used to be won’t do you any good.
Embarrassed, Emil looks away from Jerry and begins to cry. Jerry sits down next to him.
He pulls a handkerchief out of his pocket and hands it to Emil.
JERRY (CONT’D)
(consoling)
Whatever problem you’ve got kid, I’m sure there’s a solution.
(beat)
There’s a coffee machine in the teachers lounge. I’ll go grab
you a cup while you take a few minutes to pull yourself
together.
EMIL
(clearing his throat)
Thanks.
33

-- 37 of 134 --

34
Jerry stands. He gives Emil an encouraging pat on the shoulder and walks off. Emil
solemnly stares down at the handkerchief. He decides to use his sleeve to dry his tears
instead. As he regains his composure, he gazes upon the soccer field. His mind begins
to wander.
CUT TO:
SUPERIMPOSE: 1986
EXT. HIGH SCHOOL SOCCER FIELD - DAY
Anxious students and fans fill the bleachers waving banners displaying pride for their
schools. Cheerleaders dance and tumble up and down the sidelines in perfect rhythm to
the music being played by the marching band on the field.
CUT TO:
INT. BOYS LOCKER ROOM - CONTINUOUS
The boys on the soccer team put on their uniforms and prepare for the game. A young
Emil, now 16 years old, is already dressed. He stands by the locker room window and
stares at the action that is going on outside. He notices a beautiful girl sitting on the
bleachers.
CLOSE UP on JENNIFER NEWMAN, 16 years old. She sits and gossips with a group of her
friends. She must feel Emil’s gaze. She turns and sees him in the window. Excited, she
waves and blows him a kiss. Emil smiles.
SUDDENLY, A harsh voice breaks Emil’s concentration.
VOICE (O.S.)
McGilvray! Stop flirting with the girls and get your
butt over here.
Emil snaps to attention. COACH MATTERA, mid 40s, a pit bull of a man, enters the locker
room. The boys huddle up around the coach as he gives them a pep talk.

-- 38 of 134 --

35
COACH MATTERA (CONT’D)
I won’t bore you with a long speech. Today is the championship
game. The one we’ve worked for all season. I want 110
percent from each and every one of you. Focus, play hard, and
make me proud.
(beat)
Let’s go get ‘em.
The boys clap their hands and roar with enthusiasm.
CUT TO:
EXT. HIGH SCHOOL SOCCER FIELD - MOMENTS LATER
The opposing team is stretching and warming up on one half of the field. Emil and his
teammates burst through the locker room door followed by coach Mattera. The fans
applaud as the boys take their positions.
CUT TO:
EXT. HIGH SCHOOL SOCCER FIELD - DAY
MONTAGE:
From various camera angles, we see Emil playing an aggressive game. The action is
heated. Goals are scored. Shots on goal are blocked by diving goalkeepers. Coaches
scream instructions from the sidelines. Fans cheer from the stands. Players slide on the
ground fighting for possession of the ball. Both teams are drained as the game nears an
end. An exhausted Emil glances at the score board.
CUT TO:
EXT. HIGH SCHOOL SOCCER FIELD - CONTINUOUS
CLOSE on the score board. It’s a 3-2 game. Emil’s team is down by one goal. There is
only one minute left to play in the game.

-- 39 of 134 --

36
BACK TO:
EXT. HIGH SCHOOL SOCCER FIELD - CONTINUOUS
The ball is passed to Emil. He beats one man, then another. Desperately, he darts up the
field toward the opposing goal. There are ten seconds left on the clock. SUDDENLY, He is
tripped up by a defensive player. Pandemonium breaks loose on the field. Players shove
one another. Coaches argue as the referee tries to calm the chaos. Emil is awarded a
penalty kick.
CUT TO:
EXT. SOCCER FIELD SIDE LINES - MOMENTS LATER
The boys huddle around as coach Mattera gives Emil last minute instructions.
COACH MATTERA
Emil, this is a chance of a lifetime. We need this goal to go into
overtime. If you score, you’ll be a hero. That girl you like to flirt
with will love you forever. So will the rest of us.
Emil walks onto the field and prepares the ball for his shot. He glances at Jennifer who is
standing on top of her seat with her fingers crossed. He turns and stares hard at the
opposing goalkeeper. The referee blows his whistle and motions for Emil to take his shot.
Emil’s P.O.V. The goalkeeper tries to break Emil’s concentration by pounding his hands
together and jumping from side to side. In slow motion, Emil approaches and shoots. The
ball cuts through the air, hits the goal post, and bounces off the field. Devastated, Emil
falls to his knees. The game is lost.
CUT TO:
EXT. HIGH SCHOOL SOCCER FIELD - NIGHT - PRESENT
Emil stares up at the dark night sky. His face is engulfed by the smoke from the cigar
that still burns between his fingers. SUDDENLY, he is snapped out of his trance by a tap
on his shoulder. Jerry has returned with two cups of coffee.

-- 40 of 134 --

37
NOTE TO THE DIRECTOR
Telling a story on film involves real challenges.
The challenge of space
If you were writing a book instead of making a
movie, your story could be a thousand pages
long. Before you start shooting your movie,
you will have to decide how long that movie
should be — a short one is usually about 5 to
10 minutes long. You will have to work within
a time framework to tell your story.
Finding actors
In a written story, you could write a scene in
which your main character and thousands of
barefoot people walk out of a desert. In your
movie, a scene like that would be difficult to
pull off. Try and adapt your story so you do not
need a lot of actors.
Making scenes look realistic is hard
In a written story, you could have the action
take place anywhere in the world — or even
another planet. You could write about a
computer whiz who lives at the South Pole,
in a research station. In your movie, you
will be limited by where you can actually go to
shoot the movie — or how easily you could make
neighborhood places look as if they were
somewhere else. Think it through.
Wacky weather
Let’s say you are ready to shoot your happy,
sunny, outdoor scene then you discover that it
is cold and about to rain. You may have to
wait, and shoot on another day. The visuals
have to be right and making them right is not
always in your control.
Time can be your enemy
You probably have a very limited number of
days — and number of hours in each day —
when you can shoot your movie. You have to
squeeze all your shooting into that period of
time, or cut scenes out. Plan ahead as much as
possible before you start shooting a movie.
The more you plan, the more you will be able
to get everything you need done when the time
for production (shooting your movie) begins.
Money
Suppose you were making a werewolf movie.
You find the perfect werewolf costume at a
props shop, but the costume costs $500. But
your entire budget is only $40. You might
have to do some creative costume making at
that point, or rethink the entire werewolf idea.
Making a film is about telling a great story and
figuring out a way to tell that story on film, in a
way that your audience will believe.

-- 41 of 134 --

38
Producer
Works with the director to make sure everything
happens according to schedule and budget.
Writer
Writes the screenplay. Works closely with the
director on rewrites.
The key to writing is rewriting. You should do
several drafts of the screenplay. Hopefully, each
time it will get better. You will be getting a lot of
feedback from your director. One of the toughest
challenges about being a screenwriter is figuring
out how to gather others’ suggestions and
incorporate them well. Take every suggestion
seriously.
Cinematographer
Shoots the film, frames the shots, and comes up
with camera and lighting ideas. Works most
closely with the director on determining what
will be shot and the mood that needs to be
communicated by the shots. Responsible for
caring for the camera and making sure that tapes
and batteries are available.
Sit down with the screenplay. Think about all the
different ways the scenes can be shot. Consider
each one and write down some of your favorite
ideas. Go over these ideas with the director. Think
visually.
What are the roles necessary in making your
short film? The answer depends on how many
people are available to help. If there were six
people, the roles would be:
(These are not exactly how the roles are played
out in a large Hollywood production, but these
basic definitions should be very helpful.)
Director
Responsible for the entire production and
finishing the film. Defines and communicates
his/her vision for the film, sets the schedule,
creates storyboards, (see page 42) and works with
the actors. The director selects the location sites
(or approves/ disapproves them if someone else
is doing the scouting). He or she also sets up the
shots with the cinematographer and works with
the editor to put together the final cut.
The best directors are those who have a clear
vision of what they want, and they work well with
others. Getting the most from your crew while
being responsible for the production is a tough
job. Great films are created when the ideas of
everyone on the crew are heard, respected, and
considered seriously, and the director makes the
right choices.
Actors
The people who act in the film. They work closely
with the director to find out how their characters
can best be played.
Go beyond just memorizing your lines. Think
about how your character would say his/her lines
and use body language. Pay attention to the
character you are going to play, and think about
what that character wants in the scene. If it is not
clear to you, work with the director to clarify your
character’s goals, desires, or needs. Scenes work
better when the desire of one character conflicts
with the goal of another character.
Editor
Edits the film. Works closely with the director to
determine the order of the shots, the mood to be
conveyed by the editing, and the use of music
and other sound.
Pay attention to the screenplay as it is being
written. Think about how you would like to see the
film look, and communicate your ideas to the
director. Watch movies, television shows, and TV
commercials. Pay attention to how the shots were
put together.
MOVIEMAKING ROLES

-- 42 of 134 --

Directing
“ If you cast right, the most important imperative for a film director is:
do not confuse your actors! Be careful with every word. Less you talk,
less you spoil.”
— Milo˘s Forman
Director, One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest
• Getting the Picture: Directing
• Creating a Storyboard
• Checking Your Shots...Beforehand
• Working with Actors
• Directing Tips from the Experts
3
Chapter

-- 43 of 134 --

39
Getting the Picture: Directing
A good director understands the work of all
the crew members. For example, to be a good
director, you need to have a vision of how a
scene should be shot. Can a director be
effective if he or she does not know how
things actually look on camera? Directors
need to understand the importance of set
design, and the difference lighting makes in
setting a mood.
What is directing?
The director, in a sense, is like a teacher.
He/she instructs the cast and crew. The cast
are people in the movie, the actors. The crew
helps make the movie and are involved in the
production — all the activity associated with
preparing and shooting the movie. Just like a
teacher helps students learn about physics, or
algebra, the director helps the cast and crew
learn about the story that will be told on film.
To be effective, the director takes the time,
using his or her imagination, to think about
the story:
• How should the story be told?
• How should the film look?
The director sees the film in that imagination
exercise. That “mental movie” is called the
director’s vision.
Students are not the only ones who have to do
homework. The director of a movie has a lot of
homework, too. To direct a film, part of your
homework will be to create that “mental
movie,” and run it through your imagination.
If you are a director who can explain your
vision, the actors will understand how you
want the story to be told. They will also respect
your decisions as the director. You have
probably had a few really talented teachers that
you respected because they knew more than
just science or math — they knew how to help
you learn.
How do you take a story that only exists on
paper, and turn it into an interesting and
powerful movie? A good screenplay is a good
foundation but even the best ones need to
have a director that can translate it well to the
movie screen.
This chapter is mainly about directing,
however, much of it applies to other movie-
making roles as well.
A Movie to Watch
Jaws, directed by
Steven Spielberg.
After you watch
this movie, how do
you think the director
builds suspense and keeps
the viewer feeling scared?

-- 44 of 134 --

40
What makes a good
director?
Here are a few ideas:
• Having a clear, creative idea of how the
movie should look
• Knowing how to tell a story visually
• Explaining this vision to your crew members
• Working well with people and getting the
most out of their talents
• Being organized and prepared for everything
that might go wrong on a shoot
• Making good, quick decisions
• Sticking to the schedule
• Inspiring the crew with positive phrases:
“Great job!” “Well done!” “Beautiful work!”
These are some of the important traits of a
good director. Be patient. Most of them come
with practice, effort, and experience
What does a director
actually do?
In Hollywood, the director is in charge of most
of the moviemaking process. Everyone has a
vital role, but the director has to oversee
everything and everyone. The director usually
has a boss or two, such as the executive
producer, and/or the studio.
It is the director who:
• helps shape the script (often with the
producer and writer)
• lays out the entire movie in a storyboard
• picks the rest of the crew (sometimes with
the producer)
• chooses and works with the actors
• decides the shots for every scene and tries to
stick to the schedule
• selects the locations and music
• oversees the editing
• basically, oversees everything.
The director’s job
Understand and work with the script
The director is responsible for how the story
looks on film. The director first reads and
analyzes the script if he/she has not already
been involved in the creation of the script. Next,
using his/her vision as a guide, the director
creates storyboards, to show how the story
should be told visually. These storyboards look
something like a comic book, but without
words. Sometimes they are really basic
sketches, but they show the sequence of the
shots, and the basic distance and angle of the
camera. Using the storyboards as a guide, the
director will work with the writer to make the
script ready to shoot on film.
“ I spoke to a friend of mine recently who was
about to make his debut as a film director.
He was in a state of abject terror about the
task ahead. His mind was reeling with
information about lenses, and stock ratios,
and CGI shots, and how to talk to the crew
and the actors — you name it, he was
panicking about it.
So I asked him why he wanted to make this
particular story. He thought for a moment
about it and then he launched into an
impassioned speech about the characters
and the themes, and vivid descriptions of the
atmosphere.
In short, he had a vision for the film. When
he’d finished I told him what I believed.
Which is that his inspiring personal vision
was the greatest possible tool he could have
for dealing with all the other challenges. The
entire crew will want to share that vision. To
help execute it. To challenge it so that you
can helpfully refine what you need to say. To
answer all those questions. To collaborate.
So for what it’s worth, hold onto that vision.
At all costs. The rest will to a large extent,
take care of itself.”
— Kenneth Branagh
Actor and Director, Hamlet

-- 45 of 134 --

41
you have to continually communicate with
your cast and crew and use your storyboards to
give them a sense of where the story is going.
Work with the editor
When the film shooting part ends, film editing
begins. This is the process when the director
and editor take all the shots, and put them in
the order that the director thinks will tell the
best story. It is time consuming, technical, and
can really impact and shape the director’s
vision of the film.
The director does this by getting as familiar
as possible with the story, asking:
• What is the story really about?
• What is its theme?
• What mood will help tell the story?
• Who is the target audience?
• What are some interesting things you can
do to tell this story visually?
• What changes need to be made to the script
in order to make it better?
Stick to the schedule
Directors set the schedule and need
to stick to it! If you have a nine-page
screenplay to shoot and only three days to
shoot it, then you will probably need to shoot
three pages a day to get it all done. If, on day
two, you are still shooting the opening scene,
then you are in trouble. Can you get an extra
day of shooting? Can you change the script so
that you do not need the last few scenes?
It sounds obvious, but a lot of Hollywood
movies go over budget. Usually, it is because
they did not stick to the schedule. Manage
your time wisely. Think and plan ahead.
Head cheerleader
The director sets the mood for the entire
production. If everyone has fun and feels good
about their contribution, you end up with a
much better movie. So, remember to keep
people feeling that they are important. Make
sure your criticism is the helpful kind.
Above all, listen.
Check the day’s shooting
At the end of a day of shooting, the director
looks at the day’s work to review what ended
up on film. These shots are called the “dailies”
or “rushes.”
The director should ask:
• Am I happy with the work that was done
today?
• Does other shooting need to be done?
• Do we have enough time to re-shoot a scene
that just doesn’t look right?
• Is there a way to learn from today, to help
the shoot tomorrow?
Keep in mind that movies are not always shot
in sequence (in first, middle, last order). The
director has storyboards in sequence, but you
can shoot each scene in any order. You will
change around the order during post
production (after the film is shot), during the
editing phase. You do not have to begin
shooting the opening scenes, and end with the
last scene. You can mix it up. As the director,
%Talented directors have a vision of how to
tell the story, and communicate this vision
so that the cast and crew can help capture
the vision on film.
Communicating a vision involves making a
lot of decisions.
The director is constantly making major
decisions, like:
• Who should play each character?
• What kind of setting would be best for the
fight?
• What kind of costumes should the actors
wear?
• What kind of music should be playing?
• Where should the camera point?
The director has to know what he/she wants
the actors to do before the shooting begins
in order to get the best performance.

-- 46 of 134 --

42
A director takes the screenplay, visually maps
it out in his or her mind, and then, on paper,
in the form of a storyboard.
What is a storyboard?
It is a shot-by-shot layout, drawn on paper or
on a computer, showing what the film will
look like before you bring an actual camera
into the production.
Some directors plan every single shot with a
storyboard. They really picture exactly how
they want each shot to look and to flow
together. (Some storyboards are so extensive
they could fill every wall in a room.) Then the
actual shooting of the film becomes as simple
(or as difficult) as following these examples:
many of the artistic decisions have been made
already — the movie just has to be shot and
edited together.
THE STORYBOARD: two examples
On the next two pages you will see two
storyboards. Each storyboard tells this story:
A student, Anne, has a meeting with her
principal at school. Anne does not want to tell
her parents about the meeting. She goes home
and, eventually, goes to sleep.
CREATING A STORYBOARD
Imagine and sketch the images Nothing much happens here but still there are
many, many different ways to get from point A
(Anne at school) to point B (Anne asleep). These
two storyboards give you two different choices.
In the first storyboard, the story is told in a
series of 15 short scenes. In the second
storyboard, only 5 short scenes are used. Notice
the different choices that are made.
Long Storyboard
Scenes 1 -4

-- 47 of 134 --

43
Long Storyboard
Scenes 5-8
Long Storyboard
Scenes 9-12

-- 48 of 134 --

44
Long Storyboard
Scenes 13-15
Short Storyboard
Scenes 1-5

-- 49 of 134 --

45
The Mask of Zorro
Directed by Martin Campbell
Sample storyboard from The Mask of Zorro

-- 50 of 134 --

46
Decide what you think you want the shots to
look like before you arrive on the day of the
shoot. Do your homework like a professional,
and you will have a clear vision of the story
you want to tell. Also, be open to making
changes once you are on the set, and ask for
other peoples’ ideas — especially those of the
cinematographer.
When thinking about the shots, make
decisions about:
Composition
Composition is the positioning of people and
things in the shot.
Here is a basic story
Two friends are sitting together in math class.
J.D. is sitting behind Keisha as the teacher
passes out a test. Both friends start to work on
the test. J.D. tries to cheat by looking over
Keisha’s shoulder, and copying her test
answers. Keisha notices and tries to cover up
her paper. J.D. gives up and starts to work on
his test.
Try to storyboard this short story. As you do,
ask yourself the following questions:
• Do you want the shots to be really close (so
that a face fills the entire screen), medium,
or far away?
• What should the angle of the shot look like?
Straight on or tilted? From above the
character, or down low?
• From whose point of view will the camera
be looking, from the point of view of one of
the characters, or from the point of view of
an invisible storyteller? There is no RIGHT
way or WRONG way to do this exercise. You
are the director — you make it look the way
you want.
Should the main character be in the middle of
the frame, or off to the side?
Lighting
Should it be bright or soft? Should it come from
above, below, or from the side?
(POV) Point of view
POV refers to the position of the camera.
Should it be up close and personal? Should it be
angled downward or upward at the actor?
Explore:
creating a storyboard
Storyboards help the director think
visually about storytelling.
Storyboards are not about making
the drawings realistic; in fact, you do
not need to make the drawing
realistic. You can use stick figures for
the people, squares for desks, a circle
for the sun, and lines for a fence. The
important thing is to get an idea of
how each shot will look.
^

-- 51 of 134 --

47
Long Storyboard

-- 52 of 134 --

48
Short Storyboard
See how these shots show three
different points of view? One is shot
from a “third person’s” point of view.
One is shot from the girl’s point of
view. And one is shot from the fish’s
point of view.
Can you identify each?

-- 53 of 134 --

49
CHECKING YOUR SHOTS…
BEFOREHAND
EXPLORE:
a camera exercise
Have a friend pose in a chair, on a bed, or
somewhere comfortable. Ask him/her to
express an intense emotion, like anger or
despair. Experiment with your camera,
shooting your friend from different
distances and angles. Notice which shots
make your friend’s emotion appear
more extreme.
EXPLORE:
shooting your storyboard
Take the storyboard you created and check
out your shots with a camera — a video
camera, a film camera, or a still camera. As
best you can, try to shoot your storyboard.
Try to create each scene. Notice what you
like, or don’t like. Notice how the camera’s
position changes the way the shots look.
Each shot will tell a different story.
It is an excellent tool to have your shots on
paper, but things look different through a
camera. Directors and cinematographers
usually want to see what their shots look like
when framed by the camera, in order to really
figure out which shots work. They look at a
scene through a viewfinder — the viewing
piece of a camera — or they look through the
camera itself. Keep in mind, this is not
shooting the film, it is just looking through
the viewfinder to see how things appear.
^ 	^

-- 54 of 134 --

50
WORKING WITH ACTORS
Choices to make:
• Is the guy trying to show off for the girl?
• Is the guy trying to cheer her up?
• Why is the girl sad?
• Does she like the guy’s attention?
• Does she want him to go away?
The director’s choices will determine what the
scene is really about.
The director should discuss with the actors
how to play the scene. Is the guy being mean,
or is the guy being nice? Is there something
he wants from her, and is that why he is being
nice? The director also has to decide the girl’s
motivation. Why is she sad? What does she
want the guy to do? Is she angry that the guy
is making jokes, or does she like it? Does she
cheer up, or does she get upset?
Talk over these decisions, and then the actors
can act out a short scene.
Write your ideas afterwards:
It was an interesting exercise because
Explore:
actors and directors working
together
You will need three people for this
experiment: two actors and one
director.
The scene is between a girl who is
sad and a guy making jokes.
The director works with the actors to determine
how their characters should be played, and how
a certain scene should appear. The actors give
their input, but the director is the person
most responsible for what ends up on film,
and makes the final acting decisions.
^

-- 55 of 134 --

51
“ Plan the work, work the plan.”
—Tom Irvine
Assistant Director,
From the Earth to the Moon
The actors did a good job of
but they could have
better.
I learned that
The actors felt that

-- 56 of 134 --

o	Directing Tips from the Experts
52
Be prepared for everything to go wrong.
Filmmaking depends on many variables:
• The camera has to work.
• The lights have to work.
• The actors have to arrive on time and
have their lines memorized.
• The costume person has to remember
to bring all the clothes.
• For outdoor shooting, the weather has
to be just right.
The list could go on and on.
Most directors say that being prepared is
one of the most important keys to
success. You should try to anticipate, figure
out ahead of time, all of the things that
could go wrong on any individual shoot,
and you have to figure out a backup plan.
For example, if you were planning to shoot a
scene with two actors, one camera, and one
lamp, in an empty classroom after school,
what are some of the things you might do to
prepare?
Here are some answers to that question:
• Bring another camera, just in case
something happens. And don’t forget an
extra battery pack.
• Check the lights in the room to make sure
they work.
• Bring an extra light bulb just in case one of
them goes out.
• Go over the lines and rehearse the
scene with the actors. Are they ready?
Did you remind them what time they
need to arrive in order to get made up
and dressed?
• Is someone going to be mowing the lawn
right outside the window? Are you sure
there is not a lot of traffic noise?
• Who is bringing the costumes for the shoot?
Are there going to be costume changes?
No matter what happens, stay calm.
As the person in charge on the set, the director
sets the mood, and if she or he is not calm,
people helping with the shoot will not be as
good at their jobs.

-- 57 of 134 --

Production
Cast & Crew• Art Production
• Acting
• Costumes and Makeup
• Other Important Responsibilities/Jobs
• Explore: Continuity
• The Camera
• Lighting: a Bright Subject
• Sound
“ My first job in the film industry included “sliming” monsters with methylcellulose
and emptying chemical toilets in motor homes on the set of Humanoids from the
Deep. Of course, my responsibilities have changed considerably since then, but I’ll
never forget how important it was to learn every conceivable aspect of motion
picture production.”
— Gale Anne Hurd
Producer, Terminator
4
Chapter

-- 58 of 134 --

53
ART PRODUCTION
The art director is in charge of art production,
working with the director to make sure the set
conveys the story that the director is trying to
tell in that scene (the set is the place where a
scene is shot). It can be a pre-existing place,
like McDonalds, or a place that is constructed
and decorated to look like a McDonalds. The
art director designs the set. He/she can make
a backyard or a local park look like a jungle.
As with many jobs, planning ahead is key:
looking at every single scene that is going to
be shot to figure out how to make each scene
look right.
Props is a term that is short for “properties,”
and they include all the items on a set. Props
give the audience information about what is
happening in the film, and important details
about the characters. For example, two friends
are roller blading by themselves, and they see
each other at the park. They have a
conversation while drinking water, and then
one looks at her watch and realizes she has to
get going. In the least, two bottles of water, a
watch, and two pairs of roller blades are
needed.
You have probably seen the X-Files and Friends
on TV. What types of props might you need
for these shows?
X-Files Props
Friends Props
How do you decide which props
to use?
Filmmakers use props and settings that reveal
details about the characters.
Questions to consider:
• How can you best tell the audience about
the character and his or her world?
• What would an apartment with almost no
furniture say about your character?
• How will you use color?
• Does a neon-pink book bag tell the audience
anything about your character?
• What props convey important information?
• Would your character seem more nervous if
he wipes his face with a handkerchief every
five minutes?
How can you get ideas for props?
Try looking through magazines and books;
watch old movies.
What sort of props might you use to
create:
The living room of a family of very tall people
A modern-day witch’s attic might have
Where do you find props? Thrift shops,
garages, storage areas in your home, and yard
sales are excellent places to look.

-- 59 of 134 --

54
You are the art director for a scene in
which there are four characters, all high
school students. They are meeting in
their school to discuss this year’s
yearbook. Unfortunately, your school
does not have a yearbook office, so you
have to turn a regular classroom (where
the scene is going to be shot) into
something that looks like one. What
kind of props could you use to make it
look like a yearbook office? Remember:
The audience will see only what the
camera shows them, so the whole room
does not need to be “dressed” as a set.
Make a props list:
A Movie to Watch
Edward Scissorhands,
directed by Tim Burton.
This movie is especially
good for its use of props,
makeup, and lighting.
EXPLORE:
making a room into a set
^
“ I try to live by Lou Nizer’s words...
‘A person who works with his
hands is a laborer. A person who
works with his hands and his head
is a craftsman. A person who works
with his hands, head, and his heart
is an artist.’”
—Syd Litwack
Art Director, Head
Edward Scissorhands
Kevin (Robert Oliver, right) dazzles his classmates by
inviting Edward (Johnny Depp, left) to display his
talents during “Show and Tell” in Twentieth Century
Fox’s Edward Scissorhands.
Copyright ©1990 Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation.
All Rights Reserved.
Photo: Zade Rosenthal

-- 60 of 134 --

55
Acting
How often have you watched actors on a TV
show or a movie, and thought to yourself, “I
could do better than that!” It’s very difficult for
most people to be good at acting. Acting is a
skill, and of course, it’s very important in the
filmmaking process. A director can do
everything right, and a cinematographer can
have every camera shot perfectly framed, but if
the acting is really bad, the film will not be
very good.
What makes a good actor?
Just like people, characters often say one
thing, but mean something else. In real life,
people experience this every day. A director,
with the actor, decides what the character
really means — what he/she really wants —
regardless of what the character says in the
dialogue.
Usually, the best actors are those people who
can really get into his/her character’s head and
act like that character, leaving the audience
wondering where the acting stops and the real
person begins. The real person (the actor)
seems to become that character. While acting
is hard work, good actors make it look easy.
Most professional actors have spent many
years studying acting. They take classes,
watch and study films, plays, and television
programs, and read a lot of books. They
educate themselves so that they have the
background information that helps them play
a particular character. If an actor has never
been in a war, and has to play a Vietnam
veteran, his or her research would include
talking with real veterans.
Actors should read the script several times,
think about the character’s history, and daily
activities, and ask:
• Who is my character?
• What does my character want and why?
• What motivates my character?
• What does he or she wake up thinking
about or wishing for?
• Did my character have a happy childhood?
• What does he/she do on weekends?
• What kind of music does he/she listen to?
• Has he/she ever been in love?
Filling in these details for yourself will help
you make your character real and believable.
If you are the director, you need to know
about all the characters in the film.
A Movie to Watch
The Nutty Professor,
directed by
Tom Shadyac.
In this movie, the main
actor, Eddie Murphy, plays
many of the different roles
himself, including men,
women, and children. Is he
able to convince you that he is
actually these other people? While
makeup really helps, being able to
play lots of different characters is a
real talent that only some actors
possess.
“ Do your homework, show up
prepared, and always rely on your
instincts.”
—Anjelica Huston
Actor, Prizzi’s Honor

-- 61 of 134 --

56
Character:
Your conclusions about the character:
What were the clues that led you to those
conclusions?
EXPLORE:
acting in character
Pick one of your favorite movie
characters and practice being that
character.
How would your character eat
breakfast?
How does he/she brush their teeth?
What kind of driving style would your
character have?
How does your character act when
he/she is attracted to someone?
EXPLORE:
observation exercises for
the actor
Try creating a character observation
notebook for yourself. Watch how
people behave. Write down small
character sketches of people you
observe. Write down what you think
that person is probably like, and why
you have come to that conclusion.
Notice how they carry themselves,
what kind of clothes they wear, what
they eat, how they eat, etc.
Character:
Your conclusions about the character:
What were the clues that led you to those
conclusions?
^
^

-- 62 of 134 --

57
Acting is doing
Acting is doing. It is showing how your
character feels. Sometimes an actor expresses
the feelings of a character in subtle ways.
Being subtle is the opposite of being hyper or
extreme. The director often guides the actors,
letting them know if they need to be more
understated, or more extreme.
For instance, a scene where two characters,
Luis and Gail, are having a conversation. Luis
does not want to talk to Gail, but he wants to
end the conversation without hurting her
feelings.
What can Luis do? Could he act like he is in
a hurry to get somewhere on time?
Think of two things he could do to indicate
that he wants the conversation to end:
1.
2.
Conflict — Opposing Goals
All good drama has conflict. The scene above
might be even better if Gail tried to counter
Luis’ attempts to end the conversation. One
character wants to leave, and the other wishes
to continue the conversation — these
opposing goals provide conflict.
How to create and solve conflict are some of
the most important choices that directors and
actors make. The scene with Luis and Gail
could go many different ways. Conflict can
involve war and weapons, but the non-physical
kind of conflict, like the one with Luis and
Gail, can be the most intriguing.
Next time you watch a movie, see if you can
identify the goals of the characters, and which
of those goals conflict with each other.
Acting involves reacting.
Actors play off of what other actors do, using
body language as much as dialogue. When
actors play off each other especially well, it is
called having “chemistry.” Without chemistry
between characters, a movie is boring.
Example: You are an actor in a scene where
another actor is going to scream. Even though
you have rehearsed this scene ten times
already, you have to react to the scream as if it
were the first time. Your reaction to a scream
should show in:
• your face. Would it be a shocked expression
or a scared expression?
• your body. Would you stiffen up or turn
suddenly?
• your actions. Would you cringe or scream as
well?
Whatever you do should seem natural.
Another thing to remember is that acting is
constantly changing, evolving. Every time you
rehearse or shoot a scene with other actors, it
will be different. They will say their lines a
little differently, or make a new facial
expression, which might call for a different
type of response from you. That is why it is so
important to pay attention to everyone. Most
famous actors listen very well. They pay
attention to the little things the other actors do
and say.

-- 63 of 134 --

58
“ After sitting through a lifetime of failures
and a few precious successes, what is the raw
basic wisdom that I have learned? Without
the help of Confucius, I’ll try to actually tell
you something useful. For one, you have to
be willing to die trying. Being born into the
business, one might say I had a leg up on
most. But I’ll tell you, the part of my life
filled with rejection after rejection still
outlasts the part of my life that I’ve actually
worked as a director and actor.
The drive you must have needs to border on
obsession. Where does one find this? I found
this drive at a rather young age. It was out of
my early social awkwardness that I
discovered the incredible power of film. As a
young teenager, I was picked on and bullied
by more together and popular kids. I was
consumed by the embarrassment and failure
that I endured. So I began making revenge
fantasy movies with Super Eight cameras
around New York City. With titles like
Murder in the Park, I would make movies
acting out terrible murders and ass
whoopings of my adolescent assailants. More
than therapy, I realized the power these
images held. When my two-bit punk
adversaries saw these films, they were visibly
shaken, more so than their constant taunting
had shaken me. At a young age, I got to
witness first hand the visceral power the
medium held as these kids watched, mortified
at their defeat. I had murdered them on film,
and they had completely lost face to a kid
they had always terrorized with ease. Of
course, they kicked my ass immediately
afterwards, but that only proved the great
effectiveness of my little films further. It was
after seeing this that I fell in love with the
medium, with the idea of being able to affect
people in a way that they could not even
control. I saw that movies themselves took
people on rides that they had no choice but to
give in to. I have never found or seen
anything else like it.
Recognize your influences and if you don’t
have any, find them. There is no greater
teacher than following the career and body of
work by someone you admire and respond to.
Make your work personal. There is nothing
worse than making a movie about being
homeless when you’ve never gone hungry for
longer than a couple of hours. Die a student,
not a teacher, and never, never, take yourself
too seriously.”
—Ben Stiller
Actor and Director,
There’s Something About Mary

-- 64 of 134 --

59
Costumes, makeup, and hair styling can
help tell your story. Imagine the agents in
Men in Black without their black suits and
sunglasses. Imagine a war movie without the
uniforms, or The Addams Family without their
makeup. Would the story of Austin Powers:
The Spy Who Shagged Me be complete without
the transformation of Mike Myers through
costume, hair, and makeup? Costumes and
makeup help tell the movie’s story by giving
the audience visual details about the
characters.
The hair, makeup, and costume people are in
charge of visually transforming the actors into
the characters they are playing. An actor will
act the part but these folks are the ones who
make him/her look the part.
Clothes alone can tell an audience a lot about
a character. Think about the people you see
at the mall or on your street. You probably
make a lot of quick judgments about people
based on the clothes they wear. Clothes help
you decide if someone is nerdy, trendy,
conservative, rich, uptight, hip, funny,
young, old-fashioned, or boring. Audiences
do the same thing when they see characters
in movies.
Costumes and Makeup
Different clothes and makeup make the actors
themselves feel different. Do you feel more
attractive in certain clothes? More relaxed in
sweats? The way an actor looks can have a real
impact on his/her performance.
The right costumes will define your characters
before they ever say a word of dialogue.
Can you imagine Darth Vadar without his
mask and cape? How would the feeling of the
movie Star Wars been different if the main
characters had worn “normal” clothes, like
jeans and t-shirts?
A Movie to Watch
Mrs. Doubtfire,
directed by
Chris Columbus.
Robin Williams,
who plays the lead
character, has to be very
careful how “she” talks
and interacts because “she”
is actually a man.
“ Costume design at its best uses
silhouette, color and texture to create
a character, define a time and tell
a story.”
—Deena Appel
Costume Designer, Austin Powers:
The Spy Who Shagged Me

-- 65 of 134 --

60
Creating Average-Looking
Characters
If your characters are people living in present-
day America, doing their hair, makeup, and
costume will be pretty easy. You can probably
pull their costumes from their own closets, or
borrow them from friends.
If there is something you cannot find, check
out the Salvation Army and other thrift shops.
Sometimes, if you explain it’s for a school
project, the store manager will “rent” the
clothes to you for a reduced price. Ask friends
and relatives if you can borrow props and
clothes for costumes. Keep in mind that clothes
look very different depending on how they are
put together, and what accessories (baseball
caps, jewelry, purses, backpacks) you use.
For example, what if your character is a 40-
year-old man, who wears a formal suit? But, he
also wears tennis shoes. What will the tennis
shoes tell the audience about the character?
Experiment with different combinations of
clothes and accessories.
If you are the costume designer on a movie
that takes place in the past, try going to the
library for ideas on clothing. Take a look at
books on the history of costume as well as old
magazines (a good one is Life Magazine).
Put on the Makeup
Everybody in the cast will probably need some
form of makeup, at least powder (yes, even the
guys); otherwise, their skin will look too shiny
on film.
A face that has a lot of makeup on it may look
a little overdone in real life, but will probably
look normal on film. Keep this in mind when
applying makeup and experiment with how
your characters look on film.
The makeup artist should have a makeup
session with every actor before the shoot
begins and should be sure to take notes.
When the makeup artist finds a look that
he/she likes, he/she should write down the
cosmetics used and, if possible, should take
photos of the actor. That will help in re-
creating the same look for the shoot.
Usually the director wants to see all the actors
in costume and makeup before the shoot, to
make sure the makeup choices support
his/her vision for the film.
A Movie to Watch
Men in Black,
directed by
Barry Sonnenfeld.
Notice how the
costumes of “Kay”
(Tommy Lee Jones) and
“Jay” (Will Smith) help
shape the characters
and lend support to the
overall story. Their costumes are
even incorporated into the title of
the film.
Men in Black
Copyright ©1997 Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc.
All Rights Reserved.
Courtesy of Columbia Pictures.

-- 66 of 134 --

61
JILL studies a lot, but she’s a C student who is
trying to fit in with the “cool” kids.
LATOYA is very popular, doing well in school,
and she’s a good runner on the track team.
JOHN is a straight A student who wishes he
were more athletic — he often gets harassed
by other guys.
DERRICK is the top athlete in the school.
• What would each of these students
look like?
• What kind of clothes would each one wear?
• Would they wear glasses?
• What kinds of books and school supplies
would they carry?
• Would they wear jewelry and makeup?
Make a list of makeup and clothing you would
need for each character:
JILL:
LATOYA:
JOHN:
DERRICK:
EXPLORE:
making someone look like…
someone else
Let’s say you were the makeup artist
on a movie and had to make some of
the kids from your school look like
the characters they are supposed to
play. Here is some information about
the characters in a school scene.
There are four characters — two girls
and two boys — and all of them are
in the 8th grade.
^
Before makeup 	Makeup artist at work 	After makeup

-- 67 of 134 --

62
Transforming someone into a non-human
character is a lot tougher than doing makeup
and costumes for a human character. It is also
a lot more time consuming.
If your movie has aliens or monsters, you
have to decide what they are going to look like:
• What color is their skin?
• Do they even have skin, or is it fur?
• How many arms and legs do they have?
• What is fashionable on their planet?
If you can, start with some drawings. It is
easier — and less expensive — to experiment
on paper than it is on people. Let’s say your
assignment is to create a creature that
emerged from a hole in a neighbor’s backyard.
The only thing you know about the creature is
that it’s supposed to be scary looking, but in
reality, it is a friendly creature.
Sketch some of your ideas of what that creature could look like here:	Creating critters
and creatures

-- 68 of 134 --

63
and here: 	To spark your imagination, do some research.
Look at science fiction and comic books for
ideas. A trip to the fabric or hardware store
will give you some ideas for supplies that you
can use.
Use your imagination. You can find a lot of
the stuff you need for costumes at home. Look
at everything as possible material: trash bags
cut into strips, aluminum foil, toilet paper
tubes, cellophane wrap. Search your attic or
basement for old Halloween costumes. Check
out your local thrift shops and craft stores.
Be creative.
If your creature requires special makeup, you
should experiment on the actor’s face until you
are satisfied with how it looks. Take pictures
or notes of the different things you try, so you
have a record of what works and what does
not. Once you have it right, and the director
agrees, practice putting it on the actor until
you can do it quickly. Figure out how long it
takes to apply the makeup, so the actor knows
how early to show up on the day of the shoot.

-- 69 of 134 --

64
Bring everything you can possibly think
of to the shoot. You never know what you
might need, so be prepared.
Costumes and Makeup at the Shoot
Costume Kit
• Needle and thread
• Scissors
• Toupee tape — clear, double-sided tape
• Duct tape — lots of costumes in movies
are taped or pinned together
• “Wet Ones” moist tissues — the kind
for babies. They’re great for emergency
cleanups like dirt or makeup on a collar
• Ironing board and iron (if you can)
• Safety pins — large and small
Makeup and Hair Kit
• Powder
• Blush
• Mascara
• Lipstick and lip gloss
• Makeup brushes
• Makeup remover
• Bobby pins and hair bands
• Comb and brush
• Box of tissues
• Baby powder
Before
After
Here is a list of some costume and makeup
basics. Don’t leave home without them!

-- 70 of 134 --

65
During shooting, keep an eye on the cast to
make sure their makeup and costumes are
holding up. Is somebody sweating? If so,
powder their faces between takes. Has their
mascara smeared? Stop and clean it up.
Actors should look exactly the same for each
take, and their look needs to stay consistent
— or as consistent as it is supposed to be —
throughout the movie.
Often, a scene can take more than one day
to shoot. If possible, take a photo or make
notes of each actor at the end of every day of
shooting. That way, when shooting starts the
next day, you can make sure the actor’s hair
looks the same, and notice things like
whether his shirt was tucked in or not.
This is called continuity, and it is really
important! Things need to match up from
shot to shot, or the movie will look
inconsistent.
If scenes are shot out of order, it is critical to
take notes and/or photos so you can be sure
the actors look right for whichever scene is
being shot. Was the bruise on his left or
right cheek? Were her glasses on or off?
Was she wearing that watch yesterday?
These details may seem small, but if just one
of these things changes from scene to scene, it
will distract your audience.
Other things to consider
• Can everyone in the cast move
comfortably in what they are
wearing?
• Does your story take place in one
day, or over several days?
Sometimes the only way the
audience can tell it is a new day in
a movie, is when the characters
change clothes. You can sometimes
make just a little change (put a
sweater on, or take one off) to
make it look like a different set of
clothes.
• How does the cinematographer
want the scene lighted? Lighting
greatly affects makeup. Avoid solid
white clothes. They reflect too much
light for the camera. If you really
want to use white clothes, use
clothes that are off-white.
%

-- 71 of 134 --

66
You are the costume designer. What would
you have to do to get your actor ready for
these scenes? After party scene:
EXPLORE: continuity
It is the first day of shooting and the director
has started by shooting the final scene of the
movie. In this scene, the character, a 16-year-
old girl, is going home after a long night at a
party. Her dress is crumpled, her makeup is
faded and smeared, and her hair is messy.
• Is a character going to fall into
a pool, or get a bowl of
spaghetti dumped on his or
her head? If so, you may need
to have a few duplicate outfits,
shampoo, and a blow-dryer.
• Colors are important — they
affect the mood of a scene.
Also, do you want your actor
wearing a green shirt if he is
sitting on a green sofa? Think
about it.
• The color red will attract your
eye, so will large patterns. Think
about how you can use or
avoid these to help tell your
story.
• Finally, how does everyone in
the scene look when they are
all together?
^
% The next scene to be shot is the first scene of
the movie, when that same girl is just entering
that same party.
The beginning of the party scene:
More things to consider

-- 72 of 134 --

67
A Movie to Watch
High Noon,
directed by
Fred Zinnemann.
This is one of the best
Westerns ever made.
What techniques do you
think the director used to
elevate suspense and create
tension?
Gaffer
Also known as the chief lighting
electrician. The gaffer is in charge of all
the electrical wiring and equipment.
Grip
The grip is responsible for the adjustment
and maintenance of production
equipment on the set. Typical duties
include laying dolly tracks and erecting
scaffolding.
Location Scout
The location scout is in charge of finding
the best spot to shoot each scene.
Set Designer
The set designer works with the art
director to ensure that the location looks
right for the shoot.
Sound Engineer
The sound engineer figures out what
kind of sound effects and/or music can be
used to enhance the movie. He/she also
creates those sound effects and makes
sure they are recorded. This person is also
in charge of making sure the overall
sound of the movie is correct, including
the dialogue.
Other Important Responsibilities and Jobs	
%

-- 73 of 134 --

68
Obviously, the camera is a critical piece of
equipment in moviemaking. You should be
familiar with how to operate a camera and get
to know the different ways that video and film
cameras are used to tell a story.
On a professional movie set there are three
key people on the camera staff:
1. The cinematographer or director of
photography is in charge of the camera
staff, lighting the set, and making all the
important decisions about using the
camera.
2. The camera operator films the scene.
3. The gaffer or chief electrician works with
the cinematographer to light the set.
Usually, the director decides what the shot is
going to be, then, with the advice of the
cinematographer, decides what angle to shoot
from. On a small film, the cinematographer
usually operates the camera as well.
Using a Video Camera
Each video camera is unique. The following
instructions are basic to most video cameras.
But after reading the information in this
manual, check out the manufacturer’s
instructions for the camera you are using. Then
try the different camera moves and positions
suggested in this chapter.
Some cameras and recorders are separate and
must be connected with a control cable. Other
models combine camera and recording
functions in a single camcorder.
While cameras and recorders may have
dozens of buttons, knobs, and other controls,
you only need to master about seven of them
to begin videotaping. They include: power,
tape eject, viewfinder, white balance,
zoom, focus, and record.
Additional functions vary from model to
model: macro (close focusing), low light gain,
backlight compensation, and high speed
shutter and date/clock timers. Some are
more useful than others depending on the
type of work you do. They will be easier to
master once you are familiar with the basics.
“ Shoot a lot and look at what you’re
getting. The less you structure the
better. Find situations in which you
interact with the world with
a camera.”
—Woody Omens, ASC
Cinematographer
Coming to America
The Camera

-- 74 of 134 --

69
1. 	Set up tripod.
Loosen the lock knob of the handgrip and
adjust it to the correct position and lock it
down. Loosen the lock knobs on all three
legs of the tripod and spread the tripod legs
apart. Grasp the head of the tripod and pull
straight up to desired height. Lock all three
legs down, then make any fine adjustments
by centering both leveling bubbles by
unlocking and adjusting the legs of the
tripod, one leg at a time.
2. 	Attach the tripod adapter to the
base of the camera.
3. 	Attach the camera to the tripod.
Make sure the camera is locked onto the
tripod and the pan and tilt locks are
locked before letting go of the camera;
otherwise, it could fall and break.
4. 	Set the viewfinder.
Rotate the viewfinder down and towards
you. Do not force it.
5. 	Connect the battery or AC adapter.
Insert a charged battery into the battery
compartment. Put it in until it slides into
place. Do not force it. Or, connect the AC
adapter by plugging it into an electrical
socket, if available, and into the unit.
6. 	Turn the power on.
If you are using the AC adapter, turn it
on first. Then push or slide the power
switch on top of the camcorder.
7. 	Set the iris.
The iris controls how light or dark the
picture appears by governing the amount
of light that enters the lens. Set the iris
on auto or open it manually until the
picture looks right.
8. 	Set the white balance.
Auto: Set the while balance selector to the
auto position. The white balance is
automatically adjusted as the illumination
changes.
Manual: Set the white balance selector to
the manual position. Aim the camera at
a purely white wall or sheet of paper so
that the white space fills the screen. Press
the white set button. The indication white
in the viewfinder will disappear. You must
always re-white balance when moving from
outdoors to indoors and vice versa.
9. 	Set the focus.
Zoom in to a close-up of a subject. Set the
focus button to manual. Use your fingers
to grasp the focus ring (which is the
forward most segment of the lens barrel).
The following checklist outlines the
setup procedure and explains
essential video functions. It is
followed by a list of other important
camera functions.
For the field- camera exercise
(shooting outdoors), complete all the
steps on the checklist and operate all
the functions of the following list:

-- 75 of 134 --

70
Rotate it for the sharpest image in the
viewfinder. The lens will stay focused at
that distance, even if you zoom in or out.
You may find auto-focus useful, however,
in some situations, the camera’s
continual refocusing can be annoying.
Auto-focus will give unusable results if
the subject is not in the center of the
frame or when there is movement
between the camera and the subject. To
auto-focus, set the focus mode selector to
AUTO. Use the zone selector button to
determine if you want to focus on a
small, medium, or wide portion of the
frame.
10. Zoom
The zoom lens can be adjusted to get
various shots — wide, medium, or close-
up. The handgrip has a two-part button
for powered zoom between wide (W) and
tight (T). The power zoom has two
speeds. Press either the (W) or the (T)
side of the button lightly for a slow zoom.
Press them down firmly for a faster zoom.
There is also a manual zoom lever on the
zoom right, which may move less
smoothly, but faster.
11. Record
There are two red record buttons. One is
behind the handgrip where your thumb
falls when shouldering the camera. The
other is on top of the grip where it is easier
to reach when shooting on a tripod.
Press either button once to begin
recording, and once again to stop. You do
not have to hold it down. Look for an
indicator. A red light in the viewfinder means
that you are recording. You should also
notice the counter numbers changing.
When you press record to stop shooting,
look again in the viewfinder to double
check that you are
not recording any further.
12. Audio
Connect the external microphone into
audio channel two (R). Ambient sound
(the sound that’s all around you, like traffic
in the distance or an airplane flying
overhead) will be recorded from the built-in
camera mic (short for microphone) on
audio channel one (L). Set the audio
selector button (on the back of the camera)
to hi-fi mix. Adjust the audio level from -3
to OdB for speaking. Watch the audio
indicator and monitor the audio with
headsets.

-- 76 of 134 --

71
Record View
By pressing the left camera search button once
while in record pause mode you can replay
the last three recorded seconds. If you hold
down either (+ or -) camera search button, you
can search forward or backward on the tape.
To playback a scene, keep the camera search
(+) button pressed.
Make sure to search forward when finished to
avoid recording over footage.
This function can wear on tapes and the
camera-only use when necessary.
Gain
In low-light situations, gain will brighten the
picture electronically. However, there is some
trade-off in picture quality, so leave it at zero
setting unless you need it.
High-speed Shutter
This quickens the shutter speed by increments
to catch fast-moving subjects with less
blurring. The effect, however, may only be
noticeable on freeze-frame or slow motion
playback. Also, since the exposure time is cut,
high-speed shutter requires a lot of light
and is generally only useful outdoors.
More Camera Features
Standby
Cameras can be put on standby to save
battery power while keeping white balance.
With camcorders, using standby also avoids
wearing out one spot on the paused tape. You
can select standby or the camcorder will do it
automatically after five minutes of waiting
without recording. Press the standby button
again to switch to the record pause mode or
start recording again by pressing either red
record button.
Macro
This converts your zoom lever into a close-
focusing lever. Move the zoom lever to the
wide-angle position until it stops. Then press
the green macro button on the lever so it can
move further into the macro range. To focus
in macro, slowly move the lever. Macro will
allow you to fill the screen with very small
objects and is handy for copying small photos,
newspaper headlines, or other illustrations.
Fade
With the fade mode selector, the color of
picture fade in/out can be set to black or white.
Picture and sound can be faded in or out for a
soft-looking intro or exit from a scene.
Date/Clock
If this function is activated, you cannot remove it
from your video later! If you see the date or time
indicator appear on the viewfinder, simply press
the date/clock button until it disappears.
VCR Controls
The camcorder has buttons for playback, fast-
forward, rewind, etc., similar to any VCR or
portable videocassette deck. These are useful
for reviewing footage in the viewfinder or on a
monitor. If you use these functions to review
footage, make sure to cue the tape to forward to
where you last stopped recording to avoid
recording over footage.
Tally Clock
This indicates to the cast when the camera
is recording.

-- 77 of 134 --

72
Format Lines of Resolution
Format 	Lines of Resolution
VHS 	240
8mm 	240
SVHS 	400
Hi-8mm 	400
Beta 	500
A note about film by
Richard Crudo, ASC
Cinematographer, American Pie
“ Nearly all features, TV shows,
commercials, and music videos are
photographed on thirty-five millimeter
motion-picture film similar to the
kind you buy at the drugstore and use
for family snapshots. The technique
involved in shooting with “35” is
somewhat more complex than what you
are about to undertake; but there are
many places you can go to learn if you
so desire. However, a number of the
same approaches used in film also apply
to the video camera and tape you will
be using. An added bonus is that video
provides you with instant feedback on
how you’re doing, and film does not.”
Hi-8mm tape 	VHS tape
iVideotape Types*
This page is a guide to help you understand the
different formats of video, and which one may be
right for you.
There are several different formats for recording
video: VHS, SVHS, Beta, 3/4-inch, 8mm, and Hi-8.
Beta is popular with professional photographers
or videographers. 8mm, VHS, and SVHS are the
most popular formats for non-professional use.
Beta is the highest quality tape so it will produce
the best quality video recording.
A high quality videotape can record good sound
and good visual detail. The larger the bandwidth
(the range of frequencies that can carry video
information), the more video detail it can hold.
The larger the bandwidth, the more lines of
resolution there are on the tape, creating a
sharper picture.
Beta holds the largest bandwidth, with 500 lines
of resolution.
In general, when you buy videotapes, you get
what you pay for. If you buy a tape for 99 cents, it
is probably going to give you 99 cents worth of
quality and use.
Think about these questions when you buy
videotapes:
• Consider how long the tape needs to be for
your purposes. Tapes are available in a variety
of lengths.
• When you buy film for a still camera, there are
a variety of films to choose. Some are best for
action, some for bright light. The same is true
with videotapes. The tapes are labeled
according to what the manufacturers think the
tapes are best used for. You may or may not
notice a difference depending on how you use
the tape.
* Copyright San Mateo County Office of Education.
Used by permission.

-- 78 of 134 --

73
Camera Positions
There are three basic camera positions:
stationary, hand-held, and moving.
Stationary
A stationary camera is in the same place for
an entire shot and it’s usually mounted on a
tripod to keep it steady. A tripod can be
adjusted to different heights and angles.
Sometimes the camera is set on a table or
another stable surface. Either way, the camera
is stationary, but it can still be swiveled around
to shoot someone as they walk through a
room, for example. The camera can shoot a lot
of movement from a stationary place.
Hand-held
Hand-held means exactly that. If you are the
camera operator, it means you would hold the
camera in your hand as you shoot. You can
stand still or move. The image will move with
the motion of your body. Usually the picture
ends up looking jiggly. Footage shot with a
hand-held camera often makes it look like
things are happening at that moment, like live
news footage. These kinds of shots are often
used to provide a particular Point-Of-View or
POV shot because we are seeing things from a
person’s Point-Of-View.
Moving
A moving camera is one that moves during the
shoot, like shooting a moving car from another
moving car. Shooting as you walk would be a
hand-held moving shot.
Anything with wheels and a place to sit can
work for a moving shot. If you wanted to film
someone walking along the sidewalk, you could
get into a shopping cart and have someone
push as you shoot. Of course, no one in the
audience will ever know you were in a
shopping cart. All they see is a great shot.
For low-angle moving shots, some directors
have been known to get on a skateboard with
the camera. Whatever you do, don’t hurt
yourself, drop your camera, or run into anyone.
Stationary camera with tripod
Hand-held camera
Moving camera

-- 79 of 134 --

Shot of: 	with stationary camera
Write what you think of the shot:
Shot of: 	with hand-held camera
Write what you think of the shot:
Shot of: 	with moving camera
Write what you think of the shot:
74
EXPLORE:
camera techniques
Try shooting a simple shot — a dog
sleeping, your friend walking, or the
newspaper lying on the kitchen table.
Choose one and use all three camera
techniques — stationary, hand-held, and
moving. How do the moods and feelings
conveyed by the shot change depending
on how you move the camera?
^

-- 80 of 134 --

75
Camera Moves
Now that you know the three basic camera
positions, here are three basic camera moves:
Pan
Move the camera from side to side as if you
are following someone walking across a room.
Or, you can pan a room that is empty to show
that it is empty. A pan follows the same kind
of movement your eyes might make if you
were going into a room and scanned it to see
what is there.
Tilt
Move the camera up and down as if you are
following someone jumping on a trampoline.
A tilt can be used even when a camera is fixed
on a tripod.
Zoom
Move in on an object from a wider shot to a
closer shot. You can also zoom out to include
more of the setting. Moving the camera closer
and farther away will give you pretty much the
same effect, but it will alter the perspective.
Shooting Technique
Following, are the steps of the camera setup
checklist. Take the shots listed below.
Zooming allows you to take a lot of different
kinds of shots. Here are four of the most
common shots used:
• Long shot (LS) — a camera shot where the
main subject appears small among its
surroundings
• Medium shot (MS) — shooting a human
figure (or other subject) so you see the
person from the waist up
• Close-up (CU) — a shot taken very close to
the subject or with the subject of the shot
very large within the frame, revealing a
detail only, like hands, face, etc.
• Extreme Close-up (ECU) — a shot taken
very close to the subject, closer than would
be necessary for a close-up, revealing
extreme detail, like a tear dropping from
an eye.
Camera moves can reveal something that you
do not want the audience to see at first.
For instance, imagine a scene where you see
a small group of students talking outside, and
then the camera zooms in behind them to
reveal a monster in the bushes.
Long shot
Medium shot
Close-up

-- 81 of 134 --

76
Or imagine you see a close-
up of a man’s face while he is
asking a woman to marry
him, then the camera pulls
back to reveal that he is just
practicing in the mirror.
See how you can build
suspense in different ways,
depending on how you put
your pictures together?
Close up of monster 	Shot of three girls
Shot of the three girls 	Medium shot of the monster
Medium shot of the monster
Close-up of the monster

-- 82 of 134 --

77
oTips from the Experts
EXPLORE: camera movement
Move around with the camera while shooting
and see what it looks like. Then do the same
shot standing still. Take a look at what you
shot. How does the feeling change in both
instances? Which one would you use in
different situations?
Framing the shot
The way you frame your shot (what is in the
frame, versus, the rest that is outside), and
where you place the camera, can show the
audience very different things.
Maybe a scene calls for a couple to say
goodbye, and then the guy gets into his car
and drives away.
If you want to emphasize the loneliness of the
girl left behind, you might use a stationary
shot with her in the foreground and let the car
get smaller and smaller in the frame as it pulls
away.
Or you might do the opposite — stay with the
car and pull away as the girl gets smaller and
smaller in the distance. Again, experiment.
Try different things and see what you like.
What sort of feelings do these two different sequences bring up?
Which one do you like better? Why?
• Whenever you move the
camera, keep in mind that the
camera is jerking even more
than you are, and more than it
even looks like through your
viewfinder.
• If you want the shot to look
even steadier, move really
slowly and carefully.
^

-- 83 of 134 --

oTips from the Experts
78
Composition
How everything in the frame is positioned is
called the composition. It is usually more
interesting to have some things closer to the
camera and some things farther away. What
you choose to place closer and farther away
depends on what information you want to get
across in the shot. There is no right or wrong,
there is only what looks best to you. (You
might want to look at movies, paintings,
advertisements, and photographs to see how
other people compose their shots.)
Sometimes having a frame a little out of
balance can be a message to the audience that
all is not as it seems, that something awful or
funny, or dramatic is about to happen.
For example, if you want a bad guy to appear
in a scene, you may want to have him enter
the frame from the side in a wider shot so that
you almost do not notice him at first. Then,
maybe you will cut to a scary close-up. This
can have a lot of impact.
An unbalanced composition also works well in
comedy. Scenes are often funnier when they
are off-balance.
The composition, camera position, and
camera moves are important to telling the
story.
Experiment.
Do you see how a shot’s composition makes a difference in
how you, the viewer, feel?)
• A wide shot can tell the
audience a lot about the
setting and help set the mood
for a scene. This type of shot is
also known as an establishing
shot.
• The farther away from
something you are, the less
important it will seem in the
shot.
• If something or someone is
moving, you can decide to
move with the action or stand
still and pan with the action, or
just let it move through and
out of the frame. Each tells the
story a different way.
• Close-ups of actors’ faces are
for big emotional moments.
Most directors try not to use
them too often.

-- 84 of 134 --

79
See how using coverage shots
and close-ups can increase
your options when you start
to edit?
Other Camera Hints
• Whenever possible, use a tripod. A tripod
will give you a steady shot. If you do not
have a tripod and the only option is to hold
the camera on your shoulder, try leaning
your back against a wall. That will steady
your body. Or, put a cushion or pillow on
your shoulder and balance the camera on it.
Just keep in mind, what looks like a little bit
of shaking when you are shooting looks like
a whole lot of shaking when you are
watching.
• Before you settle on your shot, why not
experiment? Take a walk in the area and try
to see the spot you will be shooting from
different angles. Squat down. Stand on your
tiptoes. Lean from side to side.
• Think about shooting coverage. Coverage is
a shot that an editor uses to break up action,
to make it more exciting or more
interesting.
For example, if two people are talking, you
might shoot a steady medium shot (a shot
that shows both people from the top of their
heads to their waist) of them standing and
facing each other while they are talking.
Then shoot the conversation again. This
time, shoot a close-up of one of the people.
Then shoot it again, this time as a close-up
of the other person. Can you imagine how
helpful this will be for editing? Watch
television shows and commercials to see
how coverage is commonly used in editing.
• Take shots that will help visually connect
sections or subjects. For example, a wide
shot of people walking into a building
orients the viewer for the scenes inside. A
moving shot from a car, a camera pan, or a
person walking can connect two shooting
locations. (More about specific transition
ideas later.)
A Movie to Watch
The Perfect Storm,
directed by
Wolfgang Petersen.
How are close-ups
and other camera
angles used to tell
the story?

-- 85 of 134 --

i
80
Lighting: A Bright Subject*
If there is not enough light, we cannot record
pictures, but adequate illumination is only the
beginning of good lighting. If you have ever tried to
read a book in dim light, you know that your eyes
do not work as well as they do in brighter light.
Likewise, video cameras can record in amazingly
low light, but their pictures will be much better—
clearer, sharper, and more colorful — at higher base
light levels. Once you have adequate base light, you
begin the art of lighting: controlling the direction
and balance of various light sources.
Lighting, whether daylight or electric, is an integral
part of film production. While bad lighting sticks
out like a “sore thumb,” good lighting often goes
unnoticed by non-technical people.
In addition to your adequate amount of base
lighting, you can add or subtract other light sources
in order to create depth and texture with shadows.
You want lighting that is bright enough to let you
see what you are videotaping with the amount of
detail you want. If the light is too dim or dark,
you will not be able to see much on your
videotape.
If you use the overhead lights in a room or
natural sunlight, make sure the camera is not
tilted up into the light. You do not want to shoot
directly into any light because you may damage
the camera.
In general, you do not want the source of light to
come from behind your subject. If a light source
is behind an object, it will seem dark and you may
not be able to see what is going on, or see the
details of the object.
* Copyright San Mateo County Office of Education.
Used by permission.

-- 86 of 134 --

81
If there is not enough light available, try using
the gain or backlight button. This will let
the camera work with less light; however, the
video may not look as clear.
In daylight, the base light level is generally
quite good. Control over lighting is mainly
through choice of camera angle and time of
day and where you put your own light. Also,
when practical, harsh contrast sunlight can
be softened by “filling” shadows with a
supplementary (extra) light or reflector.
Indoors, the available light is usually not
adequate for quality recording. Most indoor
video recording requires the use of
supplemental lights to increase the base light
levels while striving to maintain a natural and
pleasing effect.
Always plan to arrive early so you can
experiment with your light. With video you
can see the results instantly by watching the
viewfinder or monitor.
Remember that video is a “high contrast”
medium. That means shadows that look okay
to your eye will appear darker on screen.
Other considerations are:
• costume
• skin tone
• hair
• background
All of these will affect your video picture. White
and fluorescent colored clothing or backgrounds
are trouble because they are too bright and
make most subjects reproduce poorly.
Avoid taping people against a white back-
ground, and advise them not to wear white or
solid fluorescent-colored clothes. The iris of the
camera adjusts for the overall brightness of the
image and will tend to close down, leaving your
subject’s face underlit. Also, small, “busy”
patterns, like fine stripes, tiny polka dots, or
herringbone, can interfere with the video dot
pattern and “dance” on the screen.
EXPLORE:
how lighting can change a mood
Lighting can really set a mood. Pick a
room and use your camera to shoot that
room for a few minutes at a time at
different times of the day. Think about
how the different lighting makes you feel
— how the shadows make the room seem
different. At some times of the day, the
room might feel like a cheerful place; at
other times, it may seem disturbing. How
does the feeling change if you turn some
lights on? What happens if you open the
curtains or shades? What happens when
you shoot the room in the dark?
Experiment.
See how lighting can be used to
make a perfectly ordinary shot
look…kind of scary? Lighting is
used to create a mood.
Eyeglasses and reflective jewelry can be a
nuisance. Try moving lights higher and further
to the sides to lessen reflections. Or, bounce
lights off white walls, ceilings, or cards.
^

-- 87 of 134 --

82
If you saw the movie Jaws, you probably
remember the music that was used to build
tension. That bum-bum, bum-bum, bum-bum
sound made you sure the shark was about to
appear.
In Star Wars, deep, low music was used
whenever an evil character was getting into a
scene — and light, classical music played
when the scene featured one of the good guys.
Sound is an incredibly important part of
a movie. It helps set a mood.
Good sound effects (SFX for short) not only
make a movie a lot more interesting, they help
tell the story as well. For example, if the
audience sees a close-up of a woman’s face
while hearing the SFX of footsteps approach-
ing, they know someone is coming, even if the
audience cannot see the person coming. If the
footsteps sound heavy and make an echo-type
sound, they know — or, at least, are led to
believe — that something bad is about to
happen. If there is scary music playing at the
same time, it increases the tension even more.
The audience doesn’t need to see something to
know it’s there. Sometimes it’s more effective if
people don’t see everything because their
imaginations can take over.
Creating SFX is lots of fun. You can make
sounds using anything.
When you are trying to create the sound of
something that you cannot record live, like the
sound of hot lava, you could record the sound
of spaghetti sauce boiling. A substitute sound
will work, as long as it sounds believable to the
audience. You just have to experiment until you
find the right ones.
If you have editing capabilities (discussed later
in this manual), you will be able to record your
SFX separately, and add them to your movie
after it is shot. You might also be able to score
the movie, which means to add music to it.
Sound
Music and Other Sound Effects
If you don’t have the editing equipment to
add sound after your shoot, you will have to
do the SFX while you are shooting. You will
need to do your experimenting well before
the shoot. Then you will need to rehearse in
order to perfect the timing, so that the SFX
can match the action. Also, you will need to
do a few tests before the day of the shoot, to
determine the most effective distance to the
camera microphone to get the best sound.

-- 88 of 134 --

83
Garbage-In Means Garbage-Out
During the shoot, microphones are the tools
we use to gather sound for recording.
Microphones work very much like our ears
except for one thing — they have no brain.
Our brains help us filter out distracting noises
so we can concentrate on what we want to
hear. Microphones take in everything,
indiscriminately — the voice and natural
sounds you want, along with the noise and
garbage that can garble your audio track.
To help solve this problem, microphones are
designed with different “listening” or pickup
patters, and with different ways of mounting.
The job of the audio person is to choose the
right microphone, and put it as close as
possible to
the source of sound in order to get the most
program audio and the least garbage
(unwanted noise).
Ideas to get you started:
• To create the sound of thunder, wiggle a
flimsy cookie sheet.
• In order to make a thud sound heavier
when someone falls, drop some heavy books
off-camera.
• To make the sound of fire, crinkle up some
cellophane or some dead leaves. If you
wanted to add the sound of popping sparks,
have someone crack their bubble gum a few
times into the microphone.
• Walking in very wet sneakers makes a nice
squelching sound.

-- 89 of 134 --

Microphone Types
On-Camera Microphone
The camera-mounted microphone is very
convenient, but it is also very far from the
source of sound. For interviews, the voice gets
mixed with too much other noise. At a shoot,
you may hear a person fidgeting in the back
louder than the person on camera.
Use the camera microphone for getting
ambient or “natural” sounds of crowds, traffic,
rustling leaves, etc.
There is a microphone select switch next to
the camera’s built-in microphone. The zoom
setting will help direct the built-in microphone
toward the actors (or subjects) according to the
setting of the zoom lens. This directional
function will work better on a close-up shot
than a wide shot.
The tele setting increases the built-in
microphone’s sensitivity when recording
sound from a distant source.
The wide setting records the widest range of
sound. Under normal shooting conditions, the
wide setting is most commonly used. This
will allow the best recording of ambient
sound.
84
Hand-Held Microphone
Designed to be hand-held or put on a stand,
this is a general-purpose microphone. Plug it
into the camcorder’s microphone input, and
hold it as close as practical to the actors.
Clip-On Microphone
The clip-on microphone (also called lapel or
lavaliere) is small enough to be clipped onto
the actor’s lapel, shirt, necktie, or dress. It is
not very noticeable and tends to make the
person less self-conscious than a hand-held
microphone in the face.
2001: A Space Odyssey,
directed by Stanley
Kubrick.
How do you think
music enhanced this
movie? What about the
cinematography?
A Movie to Watch

-- 90 of 134 --

85
Solving Audio Noise Problems
Wind can play havoc with your program audio,
causing loud pops and crackles which cannot
be removed later. Windscreens over your
microphone can help.
A common windscreen is the plastic foam
“sock” that slides over the microphone’s
pickup element. The porous foam baffles
much of the wind while causing minimal
interference to voice and music.
Indoors or out, the audio operator quickly
discovers the world is a noisy place. Many
unwanted sounds intrude on your production
track and obscure the audio you want.
Indoor nuisances include air conditioners,
refrigerators, motors, other voices, phones, and
pagers. Outdoors, you have traffic, sprinklers,
airplanes, wind, voices, and all sorts of things
you never notice until you start recording.
Make the best of a noisy situation. Choice of
microphone, windscreen, position and timing
will all help to minimize unwanted noise
and make the sound for your film cleaner
and better.
Your choice of microphone is important. A
unidirectional (one direction) type will help
reduce noise when filming in a crowd or on
the street.
Outdoors, try to find a quiet spot for the shoot.
Move around the building to escape traffic
noise.
It is a good practice to record ambient, or
natural sound for each location you are
shooting. After you get the scenes you want in
a location, ask people to stop talking and turn
the camera on in order to record a couple
minutes or more of the natural location
sounds. In editing, natural sound mixed with
program audio can help create smooth audio
transitions.
Because video is such a visual medium,
the audio is often neglected in
beginning video production. But audio
can be just as important as the picture.
What follows are some suggestions and
considerations for capturing good
sound.
Always, always, always:
• Test your equipment before you plan
to use it. It is better to find out a
microphone is not working before
you start shooting, rather than after.
• When you are using the camera,
always check your sound before you
start. Do a brief test, and then play it
back.
• Ideally, a microphone is held or
placed 4-6 inches away from your
subject’s mouth in order to capture
clear audio. If you use the on-camera
microphone, the ideal distance is
about 3 feet — just far enough away
to focus on good head and shoulder
shots. Be careful about any noise you
make. Because you will be closer to
the on-camera microphone than the
subject will be, you will sound louder.
o	Tips from the Experts

-- 91 of 134 --

• Always check to make sure the audio is
recording when you are shooting. You can
do this by playing back a short test
recording to make sure that both audio
and video are working.
• Try to shoot in locations that are not
noisy. If you are shooting in a noisy
building, or outside where there is traffic,
the sound will likely come out poorly.
86
o And a Few “Sound” Tips
i
• If you are shooting an actor talking in an
area that is noisy, think about showing
the source of the noise, at least in one of
the shots.
ADDING MUSIC TO YOUR FILM:*
If you plan to use music, be aware of the impact of music and sound effects on your film. Choose
them carefully to reflect the feeling and pace of your shoot.
One way to experiment with adding music and sound effects after you shoot is to use the audio dub
feature on your camera, if it has one. This feature allows you to record audio (music, voice, or other
sounds) over the video you have captured, just by pressing down the button while you play the video
in the camera. Bear in mind, if you use this feature, you will erase all other audio on that part of the
tape — like the actors’ dialogue!
* Copyright San Mateo County Office of Education. Used by permission.

-- 92 of 134 --

Editing
“ I wanted to be a still photographer but, at college, my editing teacher gave an
assignment to tell a story using only pictures cut out of magazines using no
words. I’ve been trying to do that in film ever since. The closest I’ve come was
editing “All That Jazz.”
— Alan Heim
Editor, Hair
• Putting the Puzzle Together
• Explore: Creating an Editing Storyboard
• Technical Aspects of Video Editing
5
Chapter

-- 93 of 134 --

87
There is a scene, about fifteen minutes into
Star Wars, when R2D2 is alone. He is looking
for Obi-Wan Kenobi on Luke Skywalker’s
planet. R2D2 is walking alone down a dark,
scary road. The shot shows R2D2 rolling
along, then quick glimpses of eyes peering out
from behind rocks. The audience cannot really
see who — or what — is looking out at R2D2,
but the quick shots let the viewer know that
something bad is probably going to happen.
It is the editing that helps build the suspense
of that scene, and it is the editor, working
under the guidance of the director, who
decides:
• what shots to use.
• how to put the shots together.
• how long to hold each shot before
cutting to the next one.
Good editing involves selecting shots and
combining them to convey the director’s
vision. Poor editing makes the movie seem
labored and boring.
In this way, the jobs of the editor and director
are very collaborative, very close — each giving
feedback and helping the other. Some
directors work closely with editors while
shooting a movie. The director sometimes
consults with the editor
on what shots she or he should shoot.
Putting the Puzzle Together
What does it mean to edit a movie?
A Movie to Watch
Babe, directed by
Chris Noonan.
Notice how the
combination of
special effects, the use
of real animals,
animatronics
(mechanical) doubles,
and computer technology
are seamless and convincing.
Babe, the Gallant Pig
Even pigs can dream in the heartwarming comedy
starring James Cromwell as Farmer Hoggett and
Babe as himself.
Copyright ©2001 Universal City Studios, Inc.
Courtesy of Universal Studios Publishing Rights,
a Division of Universal Studios Licensing, Inc.
All Rights Reserved.
Photo: Jim Townley

-- 94 of 134 --

88
The editing process can completely change the
meaning of the story.
Perhaps you have these shots:
A Boy looking out a window onto the
street; he looks happy
B 	Same boy looking out a window —
this time looking sad
C 	Shot of kids arguing on the street
D Girl sitting on her porch reading,
not far from the arguing kids
If the editor left these shots in order, it would
seem that the boy is witnessing an upsetting
event. Something bad is happening, or about
to happen, and the girl reading might be
involved.
But if the shots are edited into the following
order, the meaning is completely different:
B Boy looking out a window onto
the street, looking sad
D Girl sitting on her porch reading
A Boy looking out a window onto the street;
he looks happy
With this editing arrangement, the boy is sad
for some reason, but when he sees the girl, it
makes him happy. The viewer would infer that
he likes her — a completely different story
Advice from
Mark Goldblatt, ACE,
Editor, Armageddon
“ The job of the film editor is to take all the
raw film footage and sound that is shot for
a motion picture and to shape it and mold
it into a finished film. We usually do this
using the shooting script as a guide, and we
work very closely with the director who,
after all, interpreted this script in the first
place. Our job is to actualize the vision and
intentions of the director, allow the film’s
story to unfold clearly, and hopefully to keep
the audience interested! In other words, our
job is to make the best motion picture
possible with the available footage.
In editing, we might partially or even
totally alter the structure of the film. The
ending might become the beginning, the
beginning could become the end, we might
tell the entire story as a flashback, perhaps
from the point of view of a particular
character. We could add a voice-over
narration, write entirely new lines of
dialogue to explain unclear plot points (and
perhaps play them over characters’ backs),
play scenes in slow motion or fast motion or
backwards or whatever might seem
appropriate. Ironically, in editing, I
personally believe that the simplest, least
complex form of storytelling is generally the
way to go, but sometimes, an editor will
have to use every trick in the book to make
the best possible film.”

-- 95 of 134 --

89
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
What story does your scene tell?
EXPLORE:
Take the four shots and edit them
in another sequence:
^

-- 96 of 134 --

90
A movie in its raw form is like a jigsaw
puzzle. You have individual scenes, music,
sound effects, and maybe some visual effects.
All these elements need to be put together to
make a complete picture, a complete movie.
That is the editor’s job.
Editing is one of the most critical parts of
making a movie. You often do not notice good
editing, all you know is you have been drawn
into the movie. The story moves along quickly,
with plenty of surprises. When the editing is
not done well, the movie tends to be boring or
confusing.
The editor of a full-length movie makes
thousands of decisions, each one building on
the one that came before it. The editor, with
the help of the director, not only decides which
scenes to use, she or he decides how many of
them to use, the length of each, and their order.
1. Editors have to figure out which scenes to
include, and which ones to leave out of the
final cut.
The final cut is the finished movie. Parts of
scenes, or even entire scenes, may be edited
out (cut) if the director and/or the editor do
not think they are necessary to tell the story
— or, if the movie is longer than the
director intended.
The director and the editor may decide there
is a scene missing; in which case, the
director, cast, and crew will try to go back
and shoot an extra shot, called a pick-up
shot, or pick-up scene, to fill in the gap.
2. Editors have to convey the passage of time.
Movies almost never happen in real time.
You rarely see a two-hour movie about a
story that takes place in exactly two hours.
Most movies take place in longer stretches
of time, which require compressing time.
Jurassic Park takes place over a few days.
Forrest Gump includes forty years in a man’s
life. Planet of the Apes takes place over
hundreds of years. But all of these films
were shot and edited to be 2-3 hours in
length.
Compressing time is one of the most
important aspects of editing.
Decisions, Decisions, Decisions
A Movie to Watch
Beetlejuice, directed
by Tim Burton.
Hopefully, you have
seen this comedy
before, but when you
watch it this time,
train your eyes to notice
whether dissolves, fades,
or cutaways are used
between shots.
Beetlejuice
A still red-blooded spirit, Betelgeuse (Michael
Keaton) is enamored by a magician’s assistant
whose trick has failed, as he sits in the “afterlife
waiting room.”
Copyright ©1988 The Geffen Film Company.
All Rights Reserved.

-- 97 of 134 --

91
3. Editors clean up mistakes.
Editors clean up mistakes that occur during
the shoot, such as sound glitches — sounds
that were recorded, but not wanted. You
might have a great take (a take is a shot)
visually, but the sound is unacceptable.
Perhaps a jet flew by during the middle of
the dialogue, and you can’t hear what the
hero is saying. The editor might fix the
problem in a number of ways.
Depending on the type and the ability of his
specific editing equipment, the editor might
take the dialogue from another take, and lay
it over the scene. Or, he/she might use the
take without sound, and put music over it
instead. Another option would be to use a
completely different take. One of the
wonderful aspects about editing: there is
rarely just one way to solve a problem or to
create a desired effect.
When editors create a scene, they often talk
about it as “building” a scene. Because they
are building it, by adding layers of picture,
natural sound, music, and special effects.
Different Types of Edits
A change, from one shot to another, is called
an edit.
There are many different types of edits and
each one works in different ways to effect the
pacing of the story. The trick is to figure out
which type of edit, in each given scene, will
best tell the story.
A cut is when you go from one shot to another
with nothing in between.
Cuts can be sudden or smooth, depending on
what picture you are cutting from, and what
picture you are cutting to. Cutting from a shot
of a saw sawing away at a tree to the tree
hitting the ground is smooth, because the
viewer would expect that to happen. Cutting
from a shot of a saw cutting a tree to a man
The best way to start learning about editing
is to rent movies you really admire and
study them. Try watching them with the
sound off. Notice the length of the shots,
the order, and the starting and ending
points of each shot.
biting into a burger is more sudden or abrupt,
because it is unexpected. Unexpected may be
exactly what you want.
The length of an edit can make a big difference
in the telling of a story.
To create excitement, editors often use quick
cuts, which are a series of short shots strung
together. Think of Star Wars again. In the
space battle where Luke Skywalker destroyed
the Death Star, there were literally hundreds
of shots, each no more than a second long. On
the other hand, if you were editing a love
scene, you may want to use fewer and longer
shots to enhance the romantic feeling.
Experiment to see what feelings the different
kinds of edits create.
Other commonly used edits are:
• fades — when a scene slowly goes black for
a moment, before another scene 	comes up
• dissolves — where one scene fades in while
another is fading out

-- 98 of 134 --

92
See how cutaways can be
used to compress time?
Cutaways are also used to compress time. If
you want to keep the beginning and end of
your scene, but get rid of six boring seconds in
the middle, use a quick cutaway.
For example, imagine a scene where a spy,
dressed in jeans and a t-shirt, walks into an
airport men’s room, and comes out dressed as
a priest. The editor could use a shot of the spy
going into the bathroom, cut away to a clock
on the wall, and then cut back to the spy
walking out of the men’s room disguised as a
priest. By using the cutaway, the editor has
spared the audience from having to see him
go into the stall, take off his clothes, put on
his cassock, and throw the old clothes in the
trash. Cutaways give you more options.
Think of another cutaway shot that could have
been used in the example we just gave you?
Most video cameras have a dissolve feature
built in, and these edits can be easily done in-
camera while filming. Dissolves can also be
used to change the mood of a movie or to
provide a transition between two very different
scenes.
• A cutaway is when an editor cuts away from
the main scene to something that somehow
relates to the scene.
Cutaways can emphasize particular points of
the story. For instance, if a character is
nervous about taking a test, you might cut
away to a close-up of her foot tapping, or teeth
marks on her pencil, and then go back to the
face of the character.

-- 99 of 134 --

93
Movie:
Find two examples for each type of edit cut. Describe the initial scene, and the scene that
followed. You will need to use your pause button a lot.
Fade
1. Scene:
Fades to:
2. Scene:
Fades to:
Dissolve
1. Scene:
Dissolves to:
2. Scene:
Dissolves to:
Cutaway
1. Scene:
Cutaway to:
2. Scene
Cutaway to:
EXPLORE:
editing cuts
You can watch any movie for the next
exercise, but pick one you have seen
before to help you focus more on the
editing cuts, and less on the story line.
^

-- 100 of 134 --

94
Your shots to edit with the director:
• Close-up shots, medium shots, and
establishing shots of the student
• Close-up shots, medium shots, and
establishing shots of the clown
• One extreme long shot of the entire scene
from start to finish, from the perspective of
a nearby second-story window
• A close-up shot of a nearby tree, swaying in
the wind (a cutaway shot)
Before you start using editing equipment, it is
helpful practice to edit on paper, in storyboard
form.
On the following few pages you will find two
storyboard grids.
Create two different sequences of 6-12 shots
each.
Using a pencil, draw (you can use stick figures
here) how you would edit this scene using the
shots above.
Before you get started, think about these
questions:
• Do you want the scene to be scary, funny,
really tense, exciting, or all of these?
• Do you want to show the entire scene from
far away, using the extreme long shots?
What sort of feeling would those shots give
your audience?
• Do you want to only show the student and
his/her terror, and not show the clown at all,
leaving the audience wondering why the
student is so scared?
• Do you want to show the clown hiding in
the bushes before he jumps out?
The thing to remember is:
anything is possible.
There is no real right or wrong way to edit.
EXPLORE:
creating an editing storyboard
You are the editor of a scene.
The scene has been shot to show:
• A student, your age, is walking
down the street, going home after
school.
• A clown leaps out from a nearby
bush and tries to grab the student.
• The student screams and the clown
runs away.
^

-- 101 of 134 --

95
Editing Storyboard
Name of your first scene:

-- 102 of 134 --

96
Explore:
Another editing storyboard
Do it again, using the same shots in
a completely different way. If last
time you used mostly medium shots,
this time use mostly close-ups. Did
you use the tree shot last time? If
not, try it here. The goal is to see how
different cuttings — how putting
different shots together in different
ways — make the whole mood and
sense of the scene feel different.
^

-- 103 of 134 --

What follows is an explanation and demonstra-
tion of the basic concept of analog editing. Once
you understand the basic concepts, you can take
this information with you to any analog or
digital editing system. The buttons on the
machine may differ from system to system,
however, the concepts will remain the same.
The Basic Concept of Editing
onto a Blank Tape
Step One You need two tapes (one with raw
footage, one blank)
Step Two After you have logged your tape (see
Video Log), select your video clips and decide
what order you want them to appear on the
Finished Product tape.
97
Technical Aspects of
Video Editing*
#1 Raw Footage tape(s)
(aka “source tapes”)
#2 Finished Product tape
(currently blank, but not
for long!)
One tape contains your raw footage (video you
have collected, but have not edited yet). The
second tape is blank. You may have more than
one tape with raw footage on it, but for this
example, we’ll just use one raw footage tape.
Video Log
Video Logged: Golden Gate Bridge
Logged By: Susan Allen Date: September 15, 1997
Counter 	Description of Video 	Description of Audio 	#
(WHEN and how 	(WHAT) 	(HOW it sounds) 	(WHERE: put
long) 	clips in order)
0:30 (10 seconds) 	Medium shot of Chris and 	Can hear their 	2
Sarah talking 	conversation. Talking
about how cold it is
0:40 (15 seconds) 	Wide shot of a group of people 	General sounds of cars, 	1
walking across the Golden 	people talking, birds
Gate Bridge.
0:55 (18 seconds) 	Close-up shot of Sarah shivering 	Can hear Sarah saying “brrrr” 	3
1:13 (10 seconds) 	Super-close up of Chris joking 	Can hear laughter and 	X
around. (but this image is out of 	talking clearly, cars and
focus — don’t use) 	waves in the background
Suppose we gathered video of the Golden Gate
Bridge, and now we want to edit it. We only
gathered four shots (it got too foggy for more).
We look at the tape and log what we have.
#1 	#2
* Copyright San Mateo County Office of Education. Used by permission.

-- 104 of 134 --

Step Three Copy the clips you selected, in the
order you want them to appear, onto the blank
Finished Product Tape. (Tape #2)
We’ve decided to start with Shot #2 because
it’s our best starting shot — it’s framed well,
in focus, and it shows the whole scene. We’ll
put Shot #2 near the beginning of Tape #2,
copying it from Tape #1 to Tape #2.
Then we want to copy Shot #1 from Source
Tape/Tape #1, and place it after Shot #2,
which is already on the Finished Product
Tape/Tape #2.
98
Then we want to copy Shot #3 from Tape #1,
and place it after Shot #1 which is already on
Tape #2
.
Since Shot #4 is out of focus, we won’t use
that shot at all.
Tape #2 — this is what our brief finished
product looks like!
What you’ve just read over is the basic concept
of editing. The concept remains the same, no
matter what type of machines you use. Now
that we have a basic understanding of how to
edit, here is a bit more detail.
On the tape they look like this:
In analog editing, we must put the shots down
in the order we want them to appear (in digital
editing, you can put the shots down in any
order, and then move them around if you
decide you want to put them in another spot.)
Immediately, we know we can’t use Shot #4,
because it’s really out of focus. The other three
shots are fine. We decide we want to put Shot
#2 first when we edit onto the blank tape,
because it establishes the setting. People will
see that and immediately know where they are
and have an idea of what’s going on. We’ll put
Shot #1 next, because we want to get a closer
look at the people on the bridge. Then we’ll
put Shot #3, because it gives us an even better
idea of what it is like to be on the bridge and
what the people are doing.
So our final product will look like this:
1 	2
2
3
1 	3
4
1 	2
2
2
3 	4
1
1
2 	3 	4
2
1
1
2 	3
3
4
2
1
1
2 	3
3
4
m
m
m
X4
Tape #1
Tape #1
Tape #2
Tape #2
Tape #1
Tape #1
Tape #2
Tape #2

-- 105 of 134 --

Set your In Point on your raw footage tape
Let’s say we decide to use 5 seconds of Shot #2
to open the video. And we want to start a few
seconds into that shot. Now we know exactly
where we want the shot to start, so we select
our In Point (or it may be called Inset or
Insert Point). We select this spot by pausing at
the exact spot where we want it to start, and
pressing “Inset” or “In Point.”
Set your Out Point on your raw footage tape
Now fast forward or play the tape until you
arrive at the place you want the shot to end.
Press “pause.” Press “Outset” or “Out Point.”
Now the editing system knows the length (5
seconds), and where to start and stop copying.
99
Using an Editing System
The Equipment
The Editing System is connected to both VCRs
by cables. You can control both VCRs using
the buttons on this system. It’s like a remote
control for your TV, only with some extra
features.
Using an Editing System
Setting Your In and Out Points
On the raw footage tape/Tape #1, determine
the length of the shot
In the example up above, we started with
Shot #2. When we copied it from Tape #1 to
Tape #2, we had to decide exactly what
amount of that shot we wanted based on our
purposes. We may have 10 seconds of that
shot, but do we want to use all of it? How long
will we want to see that clip before we go to
the next one?
0 	0( 	(
)
10 sec.
Editing system
VCR B	VCR A
Monitor A 	Monitor B 	15 sec. 	18 sec. 	10 sec.
1 	2 	3 	4
2
m
Tape #1
In point
2
m
Tape #1
Out point
On the blank tape/Tape #2, Set your In Point.
Now you need to tell the editing system where
to begin copying onto the second tape. Since
the tape is blank, your In Point doesn’t have to
be exact. (It actually isn’t entirely blank, it has
Control Track on it. See the next page for a
definition of what Control Track is and how to
put it on your tape. It’s easy!) As a general
rule, set your In Point about 30 seconds into
the tape (to make sure the tape has the proper
tension, and you have enough space for pre-
roll). You do not need to set an Out Point on
this tape since the editing system will stop
when it reaches the end of the section of Tape
#1 you’ve instructed it to copy.
m
Tape #2 	30 sec.
In point
Control
Track

-- 106 of 134 --

Then select the In Point on Tape #2. Start this
point a few frames (or half a second) before
Shot #2 ends. There needs to be some overlap
of video, otherwise you’ll see a gap or static
between video shots.
Now that you have all the In and Out Points
selected, select the Insert method of editing by
pressing “Insert” (you may not need to press
this again — it depends on the editing
system’s memory), and then press “Edit.”
100
m	m	In point 	Out point
2
m
Tape #2 	30 sec.
In point (overlapped
with end of Shot #2)
Control
Track
1 	2 	3
Tape #1
Use Insert Editing
There are two ways to edit analog video:
assemble edit and insert edit (see the Glossary
for definitions). We want to use insert editing
when we edit pieces of video onto another
tape. Assemble editing is often used for
copying an entire tape onto another one, with
no editing. You select your editing method by
pushing the appropriately labeled button
“Insert” or “Assemble” on your editing system
after you have selected your In and Out Points.
Edit
Press “Edit” and the editing system will copy
Shot #2 from your raw footage tape to your
blank tape/ Tape #2.
Repeat this process for each edit.
So, for the next edit...to edit Shot #1 onto the
second tape, we will select our In Point and
Out Point on Shot #1.
Tips from the Experts
• Put “Control Track” on the second tape.
This enables you to Insert edit onto a
new tape. Control track is a series of
magnetic impulses that allow new
signals to be added on top of it. The
magnetic impulses are like glue that
hold down the new images. You “black”
a tape, or lay down control track, by
putting your blank tape/Tape #2 in a
VCR or camera and pressing “Record.”
This will record “black” or “control
track” onto this tape. You may want to
do this ahead of time. Make sure you
put control track over the entire tape.
• Label your tapes as soon as possible,
either just as you take off the
cellophane wrapper, or just as you take
it out of the camera.
• Before you begin to edit, rewind your
tape to the beginning, then reset the
counter to zero. Now, as you edit, you
know exactly how far you are into
the tape. Also, when you log your tape,
you can refer to the counter to find
your shots.
o

-- 107 of 134 --

Making Your
Movie• Your Production Schedule
• Note to the Director: a Word about Continuity
• Production! Shooting Your Movie
• The Editing Process
• Forms and Contracts
“ Making a movie is like putting the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle together: The
producer’s job is to have an overview and keep the whole picture in mind
while making sure all the small components fit together perfectly.”
— Denise Di Novi
Producer, Edward Scissorhands
6
Chapter

-- 108 of 134 --

101
Pre-Production: Week One
• Begin writing screenplay
Writer(s)
• Once you have decided what you want to
write about, discuss the idea with the
director, producer and the rest of your crew.
Brainstorm about ways to make the story
more exciting. As the writer, it is your job to
keep track of these ideas, so write them all
down.
• Create character sketches for each character.
• Refresh your memory on screenplay format.
• Write an outline of your screenplay (this
would include the main things that will
happen and how each character works in
the scene).
Director
• Go over the screenplay with the writer.
Always think about how you want to tell the
story visually.
• Start talking to different crew members
about the positions they want to take.
This is the nitty-gritty for a
pre-production, production, and
post-production schedule.
This section will outline the
procedure to make a short film
from start to finish.
Your Production Schedule
We’ve also included a few forms that your cast
and crew will need to fill out (see pages 115
through 117.) These forms protect both the
actors and filmmakers.
The next pages include a timeline and the
steps of making a movie, based on an eight-
week schedule. Your film might take more
time, or less, but you can use it as a guide.
Notes:

-- 109 of 134 --

Actors
• Participate in a table reading of screenplay:
all the actors sit around a table — and each
takes one character. Read the screenplay out
loud, even if it is a rough draft. This helps
the director, writer, and the actors to figure
out what works and what does not.
• Give feedback on screenplay.
• Prepare for auditions. Get familiar with all
the characters.
• Once roles are assigned, start to memorize
lines.
Editor
• Start conversations with director and
cinematographer on shooting ideas.
102
Director
• Work with the writer on the screenplay.
• Choose the crew.
• Hold auditions for roles.
• Pick actors for roles.
• Conduct a table reading (see “Actors”
below).
Writer
• With your first draft of the screenplay
finished, make copies and distribute them
to everyone involved with the film.
• Gather feedback, and figure out which of
the suggestions to use.
• Rewrite the screenplay.
Cinematographer
• Give feedback on screenplay.
• Start to think about location possibilities.
Pre-Production: Week Two
• Re-write script
• Choose actors

-- 110 of 134 --

103
Notes:

-- 111 of 134 --

Director
• Give feedback on the screenplay, paying
attention to what works (and what does not)
at the table reading.
• Start to work on storyboard.
• Conduct table reading of screenplay.
• Working closely with the cinematographer
and editor, finish storyboard and distribute
to rest of crew.
• Hold first rehearsal for actors.
Writer
• Write second draft of screenplay and give to
the director.
• Listen to table reading of screenplay.
• Gather feedback and incorporate any
changes.
Cinematographer
• Give feedback on screenplay to director and
writer.
• Since the screenplay is near its final form,
start finalizing location decisions.
• As an exercise, using your camera, practice
shooting the table reading to get used to
shooting people talking.
• Work with director on storyboard.
• Go over location choices with director.
• Think about whether locations need extra
help in making them work for each scene.
(Are props needed?)
• Go to the chosen locations and begin
experimenting with shots.
Editor
• Give feedback on screenplay.
• Start to think about editing possibilities.
Watch movies, television programs, and
commercials for ideas.
Actors
• Perform table reading.
• Continue to study character and memorize
lines.
• Participate in rehearsals.
Costume/Makeup/Hair
• What kind of clothing would best convey
each character in each scene? Make a list.
• What kind of makeup and hairstyles would
best convey each character in each scene?
Make a list.
• Go over these lists with the director.
• Start to look for necessary clothing, props,
and makeup.
104
Pre-Production:Week Three
• Next draft of screenplay
• Create storyboard
• Rehearse with actors

-- 112 of 134 --

105
Notes:

-- 113 of 134 --

106
• Final draft written
• Rehearsals continue
• Prepare for production
Director
• Give feedback to writer on screenplay.
• Work with actors on characterizations.
Discuss the “story” of each scene. Discuss
the motivation of the characters.
• Hold rehearsal for actors, during which you
should block the scene with the actors and
the cinematographer. Blocking the scene
means not only going over the dialogue, but
also how and where you want the actors —
and the camera — to move during the
shoot.
• Create a production schedule.
• Create a final checklist for production and
go over it, making sure all is ready.
• Before production, hold a final meeting with
the entire cast and crew to go over all the
details. Is everyone ready?
Writer
• Third draft of screenplay is written and
distributed.
• Listen to table reading conducted with
actors playing their correct roles.
• Final draft is written, incorporating ideas
from table reading.
• Final draft is distributed.
Cinematographer
• Go over the director’s storyboard and
experiment with setting up different shots.
• Work with director on blocking.
• Continue experimenting with shots on
chosen locations. Double check supplies
needed for production:
Do you have enough blank tapes? Do you
have back-up tapes?
Do you have adequate batteries? Do you
have back-up batteries?
Do you know how to turn off the date and
time display so that it will not appear on
your shots?
Do you have the props you need for
each set?
Costume/Makeup/Hair
• Have you found the necessary costumes and
makeup? Make sure you have everything
you need for production.
Pre-Production: Week Four

-- 114 of 134 --

107
After each scene is shot, take careful notes
(or assign this responsibility to someone
else) of possible continuity issues. For
example, in one shot your actor is eating a
piece of chocolate cake. Is the cake
completely gone in the next shot?
If you are shooting over several days, but
the action (according to the screenplay) is
supposed to take place all in one day, are
your actors wearing the same clothes they
were wearing in the first shoot or have
they mysteriously changed clothes?
Alternatively, if your action takes place
over several different days, you will want
your characters to have a change of
clothes for each new fictional day. All this
has to be determined before shooting
begins so that the actors (or the costume
person) can be sure to bring the
appropriate clothes.
Either you or the costume person should,
at the beginning of each new scene, write
down the names of the actors in the scene.
Next to their names, write down the
different clothes they will need. Then, mark
down the place in the script where the
change of clothes should occur.
The same is true with makeup. The makeup
person should keep track of makeup, as it is
needed scene-to-scene, paying special notice
to continuity.
Create a shot list. This is a list of every shot
you want and need to make. You should go
over this with the cinematographer and
make sure you do not have too many for
each day. After your first day, you will have a
better idea of how long each shot takes. You
may need to re-create your list if you think it
will take too long.
Note to the Director: a Word about Continuity	o

-- 115 of 134 --

To the Director, Part II:
When the actors are in their places and the
camera is ready, you shout: “Camera!” That
lets the cameraperson know it is time to
start shooting.
Then, you loudly say: “Action!” That is a
signal for the actors to begin.
When you shoot a scene, watch very
carefully. Is the scene working? Do you like
it? Or do you think the actors could do
better? If you’re not sure about a scene, and
if your camera has playback capability, you
can rewind and look at it.
When the scene is over, wait at least five
seconds, letting the camera roll, and then
shout: “Cut!” Only then should people feel
they can talk freely on and near the set. The
delay will give you time to record
over your voice (so it will not end up in
the movie) when you start shooting the next
scene.
Once you have reviewed the scene, you and
the camera and sound people will need to
make a decision quickly. If you are all happy
with what you have shot, move on to the
next scene. If not, try it again.
There are many reasons why you would re-
shoot a scene. You might not like the way
the leading actor is saying her or his lines.
Someone might have sneezed during
filming. Or, you might have to brainstorm
how to set up the scene better.
Shoot as many takes as needed, but
remember your time constraints and the
patience of your cast and crew.
Before you do a new take, you need to tell
the actors what you want them to do
differently, tell the cinematographer how
you want it shot differently, or talk to the
art director about how you want the scene
to look different. Make sure your direction
is specific, then shoot the scene again.
After each day’s shooting, review your shot
list. Did you get every shot you needed? If
you missed one or two, is there a way for
you to make it up in the next day’s shoot?
Try not to get too far behind.
108
Production! Shooting Your Movie
o

-- 116 of 134 --

109
Notes:

-- 117 of 134 --

110
Director
• Get to the shoot early to make sure that
everything is ready.
• Work closely with the cinematographer,
checking shots on the viewfinder or a
playback monitor.
• Stick to your schedule.
• Always remember your storyboard.
Writer
• Although this may not be necessary, be
prepared to make screenplay changes
throughout production.
• Help with continuity.
Cinematograher
• Place props as needed.
• Set up and start shooting.
• Be flexible.
Editor
• Thinking about how you want to edit the
film, watch the shooting and make helpful
suggestions to the cameraperson and/or
director at the end of each shoot.
• Start to review the dailies — the daily tapes
of each day’s shooting. Make a list of the
shots you like and, using the numerical
code on the camera, mark down the time
code and the tape number so you can find
the shot you want when you need it.
Production: Weeks Five & Six
• Directing
• Shooting
• Acting
• Getting ready to edit

-- 118 of 134 --

111
Notes:

-- 119 of 134 --

Prepare for an interesting and intense
couple of weeks. Editing your film, even
though it is shot, will take a lot of time and
effort. It is in the editing room that the
film in your head becomes a reality on the
screen — a challenging transition to make.
Note to the Editor and Director
First task: make a log (a list) of all the raw footage. This is a list of all the shots with
the corresponding number of where they appear. This is really important! You will
find yourself referring to this list over and over again. Be sure to mark the list with
all the vital information you need. For example:
112
Post Production–Pulling It All Together:
Sample scene description
Tape counter number on
your VCR or edit machine
1:01 	Close-up: boy and girl (happy) walking down sidewalk
(Good sound. Bright light.)
1:45 	Medium shot: girl screaming when she sees a monster
(Really good.)
3:12 	Close-up: monster tentacle grabbing boy’s foot
(A little dark, see if there is another.)
3:50 	Amazing long shot of monster slithering away
(Gave me chills.)
• Finish editing movie
• Choose and lay down music
and sound effects
• Hold a screening of the film
• Have a wrap party
Weeks Seven & Eight
o

-- 120 of 134 --

113
If the editor has already made a log based
on her/his viewing of each day’s dailies,
then the editor should review the shots with
the director.
As you log the footage, watch each take of
each shot and make a separate list of which
takes you like the best and where they are
on the tape. This is known as your select
list, and your favorite takes are called your
selects. Having a select list makes it easier
to find everything when you start editing.
Once you have logged all the footage and
chosen your selects, you can start editing
the rough cut. How you do it depends on
your equipment.
Editing can be the most technical aspect of
making a movie. If you are lucky, you will
have access to some professional digital
(computerized) editing equipment. If this is
the case, rely on the operator or owner of
the equipment to show you how to use it.
The advantage to digital editing is that you
can edit your movie in any order you want.
If you change your mind about an edit, it’s
easy to go back and lengthen it, shorten it,
or try something different.
Notes:

-- 121 of 134 --

114
Director
• Work with the editor on the rough cut —
the first attempt at editing the film.
• Your editor may bring new thoughts to what
shoots will work best. Listen to what he/she
says. Work together. Be a creative,
collaborative team.
• Lay down the sound effects.
• Choose the music for the film.
• Before you finalize everything, show the
film to your whole crew to get their
reactions. Discuss the film with the editor.
Make whatever changes you think you
should after these talks.
Editor
• You will either create a rough cut on your
own, or, more likely, will work with the
director and perhaps a couple of other
members of the crew on editing a rough
cut.
• Once you have the rough cut, show it to the
director (and other involved parties) and see
if he/she has any comments.
• When everyone is happy with the rough cut,
you should begin putting the finishing
touches on the movie. Again, what you can
do will depend on your equipment. If
possible, add music and sound effects that
will help give the movie more impact.
• Clean up any glitches.
• Make sure the sound levels are consistent
throughout.
Rest of the Crew
• Participate in the editing process. Make
suggestions, but even more important,
observe. See how a film is put together.
• Hold a party (in Hollywood, it’s called a
“wrap” party, because it celebrates
“wrapping” up the film). Make sure
everyone who had anything to do with
the film is invited.
Be proud of what you created.
Hold a screening of your film!
THE EDITING PROCESS

-- 122 of 134 --

LOCATION CONTRACT
	Permission is hereby granted to ___________________ (hereinafter referred to as “Producer”),
	to use the property and adjacent, located at
	________________________________________________________________________________
	______________________________________ for the purpose of photographing and recording
	scenes (interior and/or exterior) for motion pictures with the right to exhibit and license others
	to exhibit all or any part of said scenes in motion pictures throughout the world; said
	permission shall include the right to bring personnel and equipment (including props and
	temporary sets) onto said property, and to remove the same therefrom after completion of
	work.
The above permission is granted for a period of ________day(s), from _________ to
	__________ at the agreed-upon rental price of __________.
	Producer hereby agrees to hold the undersigned harmless of and from any and all liability and
	loss which the undersigned may suffer, or incur by reason of any accidents or other damages
	to the said premises, caused by any of the employees or equipment, on the above-mentioned
	premises, ordinary wear and tear of the premises in accordance with this agreement excepted.
	The undersigned does hereby warrant and represent that the undersigned has full right and
	authority to enter into this agreement concerning the above-described premises, and that the
	consent or permission of no other person, firm, or corporation is necessary in order to enable
	Producer to enjoy full rights to use of said premises, herein above mentioned, and the
	undersigned does hereby indemnify and agree to hold Producer free and harmless from and
	against any and all loss, costs, liability, damages, or claims of any nature, including but not
	limited to attorney’s fees, arising from, growing out of, or concerning a breach of above
	warranty.
Signed
 
Lessee
Title
 
Signed
Address	
Forms and Contracts
S

-- 123 of 134 --

TALENT RELEASE
	I _________________ give permission to _____________________ to use my name,
	likeness, pictures, and/or voice in connection with the motion picture or video tentatively
	titled __________________ for broadcast, direct exhibition, and any subsidiary purposes
	whatsoever. The foregoing consent is granted with the understanding that
	________________ is the copyright holder of ___________________ and has sole
	discretion to cut and edit the film and/or voice recording of my appearance as seen fit. I
	specifically waive any rights of privacy or publicity, or any other rights I may have with
	respect to such use of my name, likeness, pictures, and/or voice.
	I hereby certify and represent that I have read the above and fully understand the
	meaning and effect thereof.
	Signed ___________________________________________ Dated _______________
	Printed Name _________________________________
	Guardian Signature ____________________________________ Dated ________________
	(If under 18 years of age)
S

-- 124 of 134 --

Film Title	
Director
 
Date
Producer(s)
 
Day
 
of Days
Sunrise (time)
 
Weather:
Sunset(time)
Schedule (scenes you will be shooting that day)
Set Description
 
Scenes
 
Location
Talent
Cast
 
Role
 
Make-up Time
 
Call Time (on set)
Production Crew	
Time In
 
Time out
Director
	Writer
	Cinematographer
	Art Director
	Make-Up Artist
	Hair Stylist
	Costume Designer
	Sound Technician
	Location Manager
	Caterer
	Misc. Crew
S

-- 125 of 134 --

118
Did you like making a film? Is it fun to work collaboratively with others to create something that never existed before?
What surprised you about what you learned?
Did you like working collabortaively in a group? Why or why not?
Would you like to make another movie? Why? Why not?
Epilogue: Looking Back

-- 126 of 134 --

119
What are some of the things you would do differently if you had to do it all over again?
Did you make any mistakes?
What did you learn from them?
What would you think if, after you finished your film, someone else changed it?
Hopefully, you ended up loving the process of filmmaking, and this is just the beginning of your creative exploration.
Be bold.
Be creative.
As they say in Hollywood, “break a leg.”

-- 127 of 134 --

120
General Terms
ACE (American Cinema Editors): an honorary
society of motion picture editors, who come
together on the basis of their professional
achievements, their dedication to the
education of others, and their commitment to
the craft of editing
ASC (American Society of Cinematographers):
an organization where cinematographers meet
with fellow professionals and discuss their
craft.
Antagonist: a character who tries to prevent
the protagonist from reaching a particular
goal.
Cast: the actors in a film
Continuity: the art of maintaining consistency
from shot-to-shot and scene-to-scene, even
when the scenes are shot out of sequence
Crew: the techinical people working on a
movie
Dailies/Rushes: film shot during one day of
shooting
Deciphering: unscrambling or de-coding to
understand the meaning
Hook: an enticing beginning of a movie that
sets the tone
Lighting: an important means of expression in
film, lighting refers to the method of
illuminating a shot
Lyricists: people who write the words (the
lyrics) to songs
Plot: the major event of the story
Props: abbreviation for “properties”— objects
in a scene that decorate the set, or objects that
an actor uses (e.g. a pen, a painting on the
wall, a bouquet of flowers, a couch)
Protagonist: the main character of the story or
film
Scene: 1. One or more shots taken at the same
time and place. 2. Part of the story that
happens in one place, during one period of
time. Sometimes, a single shot can make up
an entire scene.
Sequence: number of scenes taken together
Set: the place, created or pre-existing, where a
scene is shot
Set up: each time the camera position is
changed
Shot: the smallest unit of film— taken in one
uninterrupted process of the camera.
Storyboard: a shot-by-shot layout drawn before
shooting or editing the scene
Viewfinder: it’s the part of the film camera that
you will look through. It shows what the
camera will record on film.
Glossary

-- 128 of 134 --

121
Camera Composition
Close-up (CU): a very close shot of something
— usually a person’s face or some other object.
This shot really captures emotion.
Composition: the positioning of people and
objects in the frame
Establishing shot: a wide shot that shows the
audience a lot about the setting
Extreme close-up (XCU): Like it sounds, it’s a
really close shot. It may be someone’s lips, or a
person’s eye with a reflection in it.
Extreme long shot: taken from a great distance
(or it looks as though it is taken from a great
distance). It is often used to give the audience
perspective — a sense of how later scenes will
fit into the whole environment.
Medium close-up: an example would be a shot
of a person from the waist up
Long shot: taken from a longer distance, it
gives slightly more details than the extreme
long shot, and is sometimes referred to as the
establishing shot. It shows the audience a lot
about the setting.
Object: things in a shot that are not people
(e.g. a tree, a car, a building)
Subject: a person in a shot
Camera Angles
Cutaway: an abrupt cut away from the scene to
something else or to a new scene. In old
movies, there might be a hero who falls over a
cliff and was hanging onto a rock. Then there
would be a cutaway to an owl in a tree. Then a
shot back to he hero — who was by then
standing on the ground.
Eye-level angle shot: Shot at eye level. These shots
give a real sense of someone’s point of view.
High-angle shot: You need to be higher than
your subject to shoot this way, either looking
down at something on the floor, or, you could
get up on a table or chair and shoot down. It is
used to give the viewer a sense of superiority
to the subject, and to give a sense of the
subject being vulnerable, small.
Low-angle shot: a shot in which the subject is
above the camera. It usually conveys a sense of
the subject’s importance, looming above us.
Oblique-angle shot: effective in showing
scenes of violence and confusion or being
drunk or drugged— usually from the point of
view of the person.
Camera Movement
Pan: moving the camera from side to side, as
if you are following someone who is walking
from left to right
Tilt: moving the camera up and down, as if
you are following someone jumping on a
trampoline
Zoom: moving in on an object from a wider
shot to a closer one

-- 129 of 134 --

122
Lighting Terms
Base light: the existing amount of light in a
room
High contrast: when the tones of color, or
black and white, are more extreme
Illumination: the amount and quality of light
on a subject (example: a candle would provide
a very small amount of light to illuminate a
subject)
Lamp: a special light used for photography or
cinematography
Editing Terms
Assemble edit: Used to copy an entire video,
or pieces of a video, onto a new master video
tape (one which does not already have a
recorded signal or control track (black)). This
process records the video and audio together
(which cannot be divided) and combines them
on to another tape. This is often used to make
complete copies of programs.
Coverage: a shot used by the editor to break up
the action
Dissolve: when the end of one shot fades into
the next one— not turning to black, but
blurring slightly and then clearing up for the
next shot
Edit: to assemble a film by cutting and
repositioning the shots
Fade: when the end of a shot darkens into a
black screen— and then fades up, or lightens,
into the next scene.
Final cut: the final, edited film
Insert edit: This process allows you to edit
audio and video, separately or together, onto a
master tape with control track (black). This
process requires a master tape with control
track.
Montage: A French word meaning “to
assemble,” a montage is achieved by editing
many images rapidly together. A sequence of
shots, usually without much dialogue.
Pick-up shot/scene: a shot that is added after
the editing phase
Reaction shot: a shot used by editors to draw
more interest in a scene. For example, a close-
up of a person listening during a conversation
Real time: a shot or scene filmed in actual
time, not compressed
Simple cut: when the end of one shot is
directly butted onto the beginning of the next
without any noticeable special effect
Sound glitch: unwanted sound on the film
footage that was unintentionally recorded
Superimposition: when two images are shown,
one on top of the other. Usually, one image
faded away, leaving just one image. Usually
this is done quickly, but long enough for the
viewer to link the two objects in her or his
mind.

-- 130 of 134 --

123
Sound Terms
Ambient sound: background sounds like a
clock ticking, a flurorescent light humming,
traffic, wind, etc.
Audio: any kind of sound in a film or video
Dialogue: a conversation spoken between
actors or one actor speaking to himself/
herself— it’s the actor’s spoken words
Music: It conveys a mood and sometimes it
helps the audience understand what is
happening, or what is about to happen.
Narration: the off-screen voice of the observer-
commentator. It can be a character in the film
or it can be someone we never see.
Score: adding music to the movie to help
promote the director’s vision
SFX/Sound effects: sounds created to mimic
objects or subjects in a film, like the sound of
a girl walking in snow, a dog barking, an alien
spaceship engine, etc.
Unidirectional microphone: collects sound
from mainly one direction. Can be pointed at
an actor to better hear dialogue and reduce
ambient noise.
Voice over, or monologue: 1. Often used when
the actor’s thoughts are said aloud (but the
image is not of the actor’s lips moving) and/or
when the invisible narrator speaks. 2. a long
speech
Windscreens: devices like a special foam sock
that are placed on a microphone to reduce
ambient wind noise

-- 131 of 134 --

124
The Directors Guild of America (DGA) was founded in 1936 to protect the rights of directors. To the filmakers who gave
birth to the Guild, the issues are clear: the establishment and protection of economic and creative rights for directors and
recognition of the director’s contribution to the art of moving pictures.
Today, the DGA represents more than 12,700 members (Directors, Assistant Directors, Unit Production Managers,
Associate Directors, Stage Managers, Technical Coordinators) working in theatrical, industrial, educational and
documentary films, as well as in television (live, filmed and taped), videos, commercials, interactive media and internet
projects in the US and throughout the world.
For more information, please visit www.dga.com
Directors Guild of America

-- 132 of 134 --

125
The Film Foundation was established in 1990 by Martin Scorsese and seven other eminent directors—Woody Allen,
Francis Ford Coppola, Stanley Kubrick, George Lucas, Sydney Pollack, Robert Redford and Steven Spielberg—who were
joined shortly thereafter by directors Robert Altman and Clint Eastwood. The Foundation is a non-profit organization
committed to helping protect and preserve motion picture history.
Through direct funding to the nation’s leading archives, the Foundation works to preserve a broad range of films including
classic Hollywood productions, avant-garde works, documentaries, newsreels, and silent films from the early days of
cinema. The Foundation also creates educational programs, national campaigns and public events to foster greater
awareness for film protection and preservation.
In 2002, the Foundation consolidated with the Artists Rights Foundation of the Directors Guild of America. With this
consolidation, the President and Secretary-Treasurer of the DGA became members of the Board of Directors.
For more information, please visit www.film-foundation.org
The Film Foundation

-- 133 of 134 --

126
Guilds, Organizations, Foundations
American Cinema Editors
American Society of Cinematographers
Art Directors Guild
Costume Designers Guild
Institute for Civil Society
Maui Community Television
The Ralphs/Food for Less Foundation
The Film Foundation
Margaret Bodde, Executive Director
Jennifer Ahn, Director
Amy Brotherton, Communications Director
Jennisen Svendsen, Program Associate
Andrew Bottomley, Program Associate
As noted, some of these materials were
developed by the Challenge 2000 Multimedia
Project, a collaborative project of Joint
Venture: Silicon Valley Network, San Jose,
California and San Mateo County Office of
Education, with support from the U.S.
Department of Education.
Also, a very special thanks to the students and
organizations who participated in the
reativity on film project:
Hathaway Children and Family Resource
Center, Los Angeles, California
Kips Bay Boys and Girls Club, Bronx,
New York
Northwest Film Center, Portland, Oregon
The Griffin School, Austin, Texas
The South Boston Neighborhood House/
Arts Academy
Deena Appel
Dyanne Asimow
Alan Bergman
Marilyn Bergman
Jim Bissell
Jennie Blackton
Gina Blumenfeld
Kenneth Branagh
Zane Bruce
Gil Cates
Richard P. Crudo, ASC
Adam Davidson
Chris Davies
Ramona S. Diaz
Denise Di Novi
Milos Forman
Mark Goldblatt
Catherine Gourley
Steven Hamner
Alan Heim
Gale Anne Hurd
Anjelica Huston
Dr. Luis Iravedra
Tom Irvine
Jon Jay
Georgia Jeffries
Jared Katsiane
Spike Lee
Susie Lee
Brian Lindstrom
Syd Litwack
Ted McGinley
Sean McLaughlin
Susan Merson
Todd I. Newman
Woody Omens, ASC
Julie Polvinen
Steven Poster, ASC
Gigi Rice
Scott Roth
Joe Sabella
David Schmoeller
Martin Scorsese
Evelyn Seubert
Jack Shea
Ben Stiller
Denise Thiebaut
Ellen Thomas
John Truby
Edward Zwick
Roll Credits
A very special thanks to the gifted film
artists and educators who have contributed
their considerable time and talent to help
us bring filmmaking to the next
generation:
This manual was made possible
by the generous support from:
Directors Guild of America
American Library Association
Panavision
The Colbert Foundation

-- 134 of 134 --



=========================================
File: employee-must-read.pdf
=========================================
CÔNG TY TNHH ĐẦU TƯ CÔNG NGHỆ TECHBYTE
Địa chỉ: Số nhà 10, dãy H, Khu tập thể Công an Đa Sỹ, Phường Kiến Hưng, Quận Hà Đông,
Thành phố Hà Nội, Việt Nam
Hotline: 0926.397.972
Email: ai@idai.vn
Website: techbyte.asia
Giấy phép kinh doanh: Số 0110801570 bởi Sở Kế hoạch và Đầu tư Hà Nội
CHẾ TÀI QUẢN LÝ NHÂN SỰ
Để đảm bảo tính chuyên nghiệp và duy trì kỷ luật trong môi trường làm việc của Công ty
TNHH Đầu Tư Công Nghệ TechByte, tôi chính thức đưa ra các quy định bắt buộc về chế tài
quản lý nhân sự. Mọi người có trách nhiệm tuân thủ tuyệt đối các quy định này.
1. Mục tiêu của chế tài quản lý nhân sự
 Nâng cao ý thức kỷ luật và trách nhiệm của tất cả nhân viên trong công ty.
 Đảm bảo hiệu suất công việc, mọi nhiệm vụ phải được hoàn thành đúng tiến độ và chất
lượng.
 Tạo dựng một môi trường làm việc chuyên nghiệp và tích cực, góp phần vào sự phát
triển bền vững của công ty.
2. Quy định bắt buộc về thời gian làm việc và trả lời tin nhắn
1. Thời gian làm việc: Mỗi nhân viên làm việc 7 tiếng mỗi ngày, bắt đầu từ 9 giờ sáng.
2. Sử dụng tài khoản Zalo công việc:
- Công ty đã cấp tài khoản Zalo riêng cho từng nhân viên phục vụ công việc.
Trong giờ làm việc, tất cả phải luôn online và sẵn sàng phản hồi tin nhắn từ cấp
trên.
- Thời gian trả lời tin nhắn từ cấp trên là trong vòng 10 phút. Nếu vi phạm, sẽ bị
xử lý nghiêm ngặt.
3. Các chế tài và hình thức xử phạt

-- 1 of 3 --

3.1. Cảnh Báo
 Lần vi phạm đầu tiên: Nếu không trả lời tin nhắn trong thời gian quy định (10 phút)
hoặc có hành vi đi làm muộn, nhân viên sẽ nhận cảnh báo.
3.2. Phạt Tiền
 Vi phạm lần thứ hai: Nhân viên sẽ bị phạt tiền.
- Đi làm muộn mỗi phút: Phạt 5,000 VND/phút nếu đến sau giờ làm việc quy
định (9 giờ sáng).
- Không trả lời tin nhắn trong thời gian quy định sẽ áp dụng mức phạt tương tự
sau lần cảnh báo đầu tiên.
3.3. Kỷ luật
 Lập biên bản và giảm thưởng: Áp dụng nếu nhân viên tiếp tục vi phạm sau khi đã bị
cảnh báo và phạt tiền nhiều lần. Nhân viên sẽ bị lập biên bản vi phạm và có thể bị giảm
thưởng hàng tháng tùy theo mức độ vi phạm.
3.4. Hạn chế thăng tiến hoặc tăng lương
 Nhân viên có nhiều lần vi phạm hoặc liên tục không đạt yêu cầu công việc sẽ không
được xét thăng tiến hoặc tăng lương trong kỳ đánh giá tiếp theo. Quy định này là để
khuyến khích các bạn cải thiện và cống hiến hơn.
3.5. Treo thưởng cuối năm hoặc thưởng năng suất
 Nhân viên có 3 lần vi phạm trở lên trong năm sẽ không được xét thưởng năng suất cuối
năm. Chúng tôi ưu tiên và ghi nhận sự đóng góp tích cực, có trách nhiệm.
3.6. Yêu cầu tham gia các khóa đào tạo bắt buộc
 Nhân viên vi phạm do thiếu kỹ năng hoặc chưa hiểu rõ quy trình công việc sẽ được
yêu cầu tham gia các khóa đào tạo bắt buộc. Điều này giúp các bạn bổ sung kỹ năng
và nâng cao năng lực làm việc.
3.7. Giảm hoặc không thưởng dự án
 Nếu nhân viên không hoàn thành nhiệm vụ dự án hoặc có hành vi vi phạm trong quá
trình thực hiện, thưởng dự án sẽ bị giảm hoặc không được nhận.
3.8. Cắt giảm quyền lợi

-- 2 of 3 --

 Nhân viên có hành vi vi phạm nghiêm trọng hoặc tái phạm nhiều lần sẽ bị cắt giảm
một phần quyền lợi như phụ cấp hoặc thưởng. Điều này nhằm đảm bảo tính công bằng
và khuyến khích tuân thủ quy định.
4. Quy trình xử lý vi phạm
1. Bước 1: Nhắc nhở và cảnh báo trực tiếp đối với lần vi phạm đầu tiên.
2. Bước 2: Lập biên bản và áp dụng mức phạt tiền nếu vi phạm lần thứ hai.
3. Bước 3: Tiến hành kỷ luật, hạn chế thăng tiến hoặc giảm thưởng nếu vi phạm tiếp diễn
hoặc ở mức độ nghiêm trọng.
4. Bước 4: Xem xét điều chỉnh các quyền lợi, yêu cầu tham gia đào tạo hoặc giảm thưởng
dự án trong trường hợp tái phạm nhiều lần hoặc ảnh hưởng đến công việc chung.
5. Yêu cầu tuân thủ và cam kết
Mọi nhân viên đều phải tuân thủ nghiêm túc các quy định này. Đây là điều bắt buộc, không
ngoại lệ. Tất cả các biện pháp xử phạt đều được thực hiện minh bạch và tuân thủ theo Bộ luật
Lao động Việt Nam và các quy định pháp luật khác.
Lưu ý: Bất kỳ vi phạm nào đối với các quy định trên đều sẽ được xử lý nghiêm túc và không
có ngoại lệ.
Cảm ơn toàn thể nhân viên đã hợp tác và nghiêm túc thực hiện.

-- 3 of 3 --



=========================================
File: Báo cáo Tổng quan thông tin sản phẩm.pdf
=========================================
iGen ERP -
Trợ lý số thông minh
A. Dashboard
1. Dashboard Tổng quan Doanh nghiệp
Mục tiêu / Vai trò chính
Dashboard Tổng quan Doanh nghiệp đóng vai trò là "Trung tâm điều hành số" thu nhỏ cho cả
CEO/Chủ doanh nghiệp và các cấp Quản lý trung cấp. Thay vì phải tốn thời gian truy cập vào
từng phân hệ riêng lẻ, màn hình này cung cấp một bức tranh toàn cảnh, tức thời về sức khỏe
của toàn bộ tổ chức (từ tài chính, nhân sự, kho vận đến tiếp thị) chỉ trong vòng một vài phút
quan sát đầu ngày.
Nỗi đau giải quyết (Pain point matching)
● Vận hành manh mún, thiếu đồng bộ: Khắc phục tình trạng người quản lý phải mở
hàng loạt bảng tính excel hoặc nhảy qua lại giữa nhiều phần mềm rời rạc để kiểm tra
báo cáo hàng ngày.
● Quá tải thông tin (Dashboard fatigue): Giúp người điều hành không bị lạc lối giữa các
biểu đồ phức tạp mà không biết bắt đầu xử lý từ đâu. Hệ thống tự động lọc và hiển thị
những chỉ số quan trọng nhất.
● Chậm trễ trong việc ra quyết định: Giảm thiểu rủi ro phát hiện vấn đề quá muộn (ví dụ:
chỉ biết kho hết hàng khi khách phàn nàn, hoặc bỏ quên tệp khách cũ có khả năng mua
thêm khi doanh số sụt giảm).
Các thông số / Tính năng hiển thị chính (Bức tranh trực quan)
Nhìn vào giao diện Dashboard tổng quan, người quản lý có thể nắm bắt ngay tình hình thông
qua các phân khu được thiết kế rõ ràng:
1. Hệ thống thẻ đo lường nhanh đa bộ phận (Màn hình phía trên)

-- 1 of 35 --

● Nhân sự: Theo dõi tổng quy mô nhân sự hiện tại (245 nhân viên) đi kèm chỉ số Độ hài
lòng (92%) để kiểm soát nhanh mức độ gắn kết của đội ngũ, phòng ngừa rủi ro biến
động nhân sự.
● Kho & Sản phẩm: Nhận diện ngay mức độ an toàn của nguồn hàng thông qua tổng sản
phẩm hiện có và số lượng đơn đang chờ xuất, nổi bật với huy hiệu đỏ "Cảnh báo" nếu
phát hiện các nút thắt trong chuỗi cung ứng.
● Marketing: Đo lường hiệu suất của bộ máy tiếp thị qua số lượng nội dung được sản
xuất bằng công nghệ AI và Tỉ lệ duyệt nội dung (85%) của quản lý để đảm bảo tần suất
phủ sóng thương hiệu.
● Doanh thu: Giám sát trực tiếp dòng tiền qua tổng doanh thu trong kỳ và số lượng khách
hàng tiềm năng mới (Leads mới) được đưa về hệ thống.
2. Biểu đồ xu hướng và phân tích nguồn lực (Màn hình trung tâm)
● Biểu đồ Doanh thu & Hiệu suất AI: Trực quan hóa dòng tiền tăng trưởng song hành
cùng hiệu suất xử lý công việc tự động của các trợ lý AI theo dòng thời gian.
● Hiệu suất kênh Marketing: Biểu đồ tròn phân tách rõ ràng hiệu quả thu hút khách hàng
từ các nguồn (Social Media, Email, SEO/Organic, Paid Ads), giúp người quản lý phân bổ
ngân sách quảng cáo đúng chỗ, tránh lãng phí.
3. Các lối tắt (Shortcut) hành động nhanh (Màn hình dưới cùng)
● Cảnh báo tồn kho: Danh sách hiển thị trực tiếp các mã sản phẩm đang chạm ngưỡng
tối thiểu tại từng chi nhánh (Ví dụ: iPhone 15 Pro Max còn lại 12 máy tại Kho Quận 7) để
quản lý nắm bắt ngay lập tức.
● Nội dung chờ duyệt: Hiển thị các bài viết tiếp thị quan trọng đang chờ kiểm duyệt (Ví
dụ: "Campaign FB: Mùa Hè") kèm nút [Duyệt] nhanh trực tiếp trên màn hình, tối giản
thao tác nhấp chuột.
Hành động tiếp theo (AI gợi ý & Hướng xử lý)
Nằm ở cột bên phải màn hình, tính năng "AI Đề xuất" đóng vai trò hỗ trợ đắc lực cho người
điều hành thông qua 3 giá trị cốt lõi:
● Chủ động cảnh báo sớm rủi ro và cơ hội: Trợ lý AI tự động quét dữ liệu liên phòng
ban để dự báo trước các vấn đề phát sinh (Ví dụ: Cảnh báo chiếc MacBook Pro M3 có
nguy cơ hết hàng trong 3 ngày tới tại Kho Tân Bình, hoặc phát hiện cụm 45 khách hàng
tiềm năng đang sử dụng CRM nhưng chưa được chào mời gói nâng cấp).
● Chuyển hóa dữ liệu thành hành động thực tế (Actionable Insights): Không dừng lại
ở việc đưa ra số liệu cảnh báo, AI đề xuất ngay các hành động cụ thể bằng ngôn ngữ tự

-- 2 of 35 --

nhiên như [Tạo đơn nhập kho ngay]. Người quản lý chỉ cần nhấn nút để hệ thống tự
động thiết lập đơn hàng thô, giảm thiểu thời gian xử lý thủ công.
● Đồng bộ hóa nhịp độ Cung và Cầu: Bằng cách đặt cảnh báo kho vận ngay cạnh các
đề xuất bán thêm (Cross-sell/Up-sell) trên cùng một bảng điều khiển, AI giúp người điều
hành cân đối dòng tiền nhanh chóng: thúc đẩy nhập thêm các sản phẩm đang bán chạy,
đồng thời kích hoạt chiến dịch tiếp thị hướng tới tệp khách hàng cũ để giải phóng các
mặt hàng tồn đọng.
2. Dashboard Phân tích doanh thu
Mục tiêu / Vai trò chính
Dashboard Phân tích doanh thu cung cấp cho nhà quản lý một không gian phân tích chuyên sâu
về dòng tiền và hiệu quả bán hàng. Nhờ các chỉ số thời gian thực và biểu đồ đối sánh, người
điều hành có thể liên tục theo dõi "sức khỏe" tài chính của doanh nghiệp, đánh giá hiệu quả của
các kênh phân phối và đưa ra những điều chỉnh chiến lược kịp thời thay vì đợi đến kỳ báo cáo
cuối tháng.

-- 3 of 35 --

Nỗi đau giải quyết (Pain point matching)
● Báo cáo tài chính bị chậm trễ: Khắc phục triệt để tình trạng "cuối tháng mới biết lỗ hay
lãi". Chủ doanh nghiệp kiểm soát được biến động doanh thu theo ngày để phản ứng
nhanh trước các tình huống bất lợi.
● Đầu tư ngân sách dàn trải, thiếu hiệu quả: Giải quyết bài toán không rõ dòng tiền thực
sự đang đổ về từ kênh nào, giúp doanh nghiệp tránh lãng phí chi phí marketing và nhân
sự vào các kênh kém hiệu quả.
● Bỏ sót dấu hiệu suy giảm sức mua: Giúp phát hiện sớm xu hướng mua sắm nhỏ lẻ
của khách hàng trước khi nó ảnh hưởng nghiêm trọng đến tổng doanh số.
Các thông số / Tính năng hiển thị chính (Bức tranh trực quan)
Giao diện trực quan của Dashboard Phân tích doanh thu giúp người quản lý dễ dàng đối chiếu
dữ liệu qua các phân khu sau:
1. Hệ thống 4 chỉ số sức khỏe tài chính (Màn hình phía trên)
● Tổng doanh thu (đ2.4B - Tăng 12.5%): Con số tổng quan giúp người điều hành đánh
giá nhanh tiến độ đạt mục tiêu tài chính của doanh nghiệp trong kỳ.
● Tốc độ tăng trưởng (18.4% - Tăng 5.2%): Thể hiện tốc độ mở rộng quy mô kinh doanh
so với kỳ trước, đảm bảo doanh nghiệp đang đi đúng hướng phát triển.
● Giá trị đơn hàng trung bình - AOV (đ450K - Giảm 1.2%): Đóng vai trò là hệ thống
cảnh báo sớm. Xu hướng giảm nhẹ (-1.2%) giúp nhà quản lý phát hiện ngay việc đội ngũ
sales đang bán các đơn hàng nhỏ lẻ, rời rạc. Từ đó, doanh nghiệp có thể kịp thời đưa ra
chính sách bán hàng theo combo hoặc đào tạo lại kỹ thuật up-sell/cross-sell để kéo giá
trị đơn hàng đi lên.
● Tỉ lệ chuyển đổi (3.8% - Tăng 2.1%): Phản ánh năng lực chốt hợp đồng của bộ phận
kinh doanh từ tệp khách hàng tiềm năng đưa về.
2. Biểu đồ Xu hướng doanh thu (Màn hình trung tâm - Bên trái)
● Biểu đồ cột so sánh trực quan doanh thu thực tế hiện tại với cùng kỳ năm trước.
● Lợi ích: Giúp doanh nghiệp nhận diện rõ tính mùa vụ của sản phẩm để chủ động chuẩn
bị trước dòng tiền, kế hoạch nhập hàng, đồng thời đánh giá chính xác các chiến dịch
kinh doanh năm nay có thực sự tối ưu hơn năm ngoái hay không.
3. Biểu đồ Cơ cấu nguồn doanh thu (Màn hình trung tâm - Bên phải)
● Biểu đồ donut phân tách nguồn doanh thu theo từng kênh bán hàng cụ thể (Ví dụ: Direct
Sales chiếm tỷ trọng 45%).

-- 4 of 35 --

● Lợi ích: Giúp chủ doanh nghiệp biết chính xác kênh nào đang mang lại dòng tiền hiệu
quả nhất để tập trung nguồn lực nhân sự sales và ngân sách tiếp thị vào đó, tối ưu hóa
chi phí vận hành.
Hành động tiếp theo (AI gợi ý / Call to action)
Khi phát hiện các chỉ số doanh thu hoặc giá trị đơn hàng trung bình (AOV) có dấu hiệu suy giảm
trên màn hình này, người quản lý có thể thực hiện nhanh hai hướng xử lý:
● Kiểm tra phễu bán hàng: Nhanh chóng click chuyển hướng sang phân hệ Sales CRM
để rà soát danh sách khách hàng ở trạng thái "Nóng" và "Ấm", thúc đẩy nhân viên tập
trung chốt các giao dịch có giá trị lớn.
● Kích hoạt chương trình thúc đẩy doanh số: Thiết lập và phát động ngay một chiến
dịch ưu đãi mới hoặc chính sách bán hàng combo trực tiếp trên hệ thống để nhanh
chóng cải thiện chỉ số AOV trong ngắn hạn.

-- 5 of 35 --

3. Dashboard Hiệu suất AI
Mục tiêu / Vai trò chính
Dashboard Hiệu suất AI hoạt động như một bảng đo lường giá trị thực tế và hiệu quả đầu tư
(ROI) của các "nhân viên kỹ thuật số" (AI Agents) trong doanh nghiệp. Tab này giúp người điều
hành đánh giá khách quan năng lực tự động hóa, kiểm soát chất lượng vận hành của AI và đưa
ra các quyết định nhân sự cũng như công nghệ một cách chuẩn xác dựa trên dữ liệu thực tế.
Nỗi đau giải quyết (Pain point matching)
● Mơ hồ về hiệu quả đầu tư công nghệ: Giải quyết hoài nghi của chủ doanh nghiệp khi
đầu tư vào AI nhưng không biết công nghệ này có thực sự giúp ích hay chỉ làm lãng phí
ngân sách.
● Nỗi sợ AI phản hồi sai lệch: Đập tan lo lắng về việc AI tự động trả lời sai kịch bản,
phản hồi vụng về làm mất lòng khách hàng mà quản lý không hề hay biết.
● Không tối ưu được định biên nhân sự: Khắc phục tình trạng không nắm rõ nhân viên
thực tế đã được giải phóng khỏi các việc lặp đi lặp lại hay chưa để phân bổ lại nguồn lực
hợp lý.
Các thông số / Tính năng hiển thị chính (Bức tranh trực quan)
Giao diện trực quan của Dashboard Hiệu suất AI giúp người quản lý đối chiếu hiệu quả tự động
hóa qua các phân khu sau:
1. Thống kê giá trị quy đổi trực tiếp (Màn hình phía trên)
● Tác vụ xử lý (12,450 - Tăng 15%): Tổng số lượng công việc đã được hoàn thành tự
động hoàn toàn bởi các trợ lý AI trong kỳ.
● Thời gian tiết kiệm (840h - Tăng 8%): Con số này quy đổi trực tiếp ra việc tối ưu hóa
chi phí nhân lực tương đương (tiết kiệm được quỹ thời gian làm việc của nhiều nhân sự
thực tế).
● Độ chính xác (98.2%): Chỉ số trung bình chứng minh độ an toàn và chuẩn xác của hệ
thống, mang lại sự an tâm tuyệt đối cho người vận hành.
● Hài lòng KH (4.9/5 - Tăng 0.2): Minh chứng thực tế từ phản hồi của khách hàng, khẳng
định AI phản hồi tự nhiên, giải quyết đúng nhu cầu và bảo vệ tốt trải nghiệm của khách
hàng.
2. Biểu đồ Khối lượng công việc: AI vs Human (Màn hình trung tâm - Bên phải)

-- 6 of 35 --

● So sánh trực quan số lượng tác vụ do AI tự động xử lý (cột màu xanh đậm) và con
người tự tay thực hiện (cột màu xanh nhạt) theo từng ngày trong tuần.
● Lợi ích: Giúp nhà quản lý thấy rõ tỷ lệ công việc chân tay đã được giải phóng sang hệ
thống tự động, làm cơ sở thực tế để tinh giản quy trình hoặc chuyển dịch nhân sự sang
các tác vụ sáng tạo, mang lại giá trị gia tăng cao hơn.
3. Danh sách giám sát Trạng thái Agent AI (Màn hình trung tâm - Bên trái)
● Hiển thị danh sách và điểm hiệu suất của các "nhân viên số" đang vận hành trong các
phòng ban:
○ Sales Bot (Active - 95 điểm): Đang hoạt động tốt trên các kênh tư vấn trực
tuyến.
○ Marketing Writer (Learning - 88 điểm): Đang trong giai đoạn huấn luyện thêm
dữ liệu tiếp thị.
○ Inventory Predictor (Idle - Chờ dữ liệu): Đang tạm nghỉ do cần nạp thêm dữ
liệu kho vận.
● Lợi ích: Giúp người điều hành kiểm soát chặt chẽ tiến trình làm việc của từng Agent,
biết chính xác khi nào hệ thống cần tinh chỉnh hoặc bổ sung tư liệu huấn luyện.
Hành động tiếp theo và Đề xuất tối ưu từ AI (Call to action)
Tại góc dưới của bảng điều khiển, dựa trên việc tự động phân tích các chỉ số hiệu suất, hệ thống
sẽ đề xuất các hành động tức thời để tối ưu hóa vận hành:
1. Xử lý tắc nghẽn vận hành (Sales CRM Bottleneck)
● Tình huống: AI phát hiện Sales Bot đang gặp khó khăn khi phân loại lead từ chiến dịch
"Mùa Hè" do dữ liệu đầu vào thay đổi.
● Hành động nhanh: Người quản lý chỉ cần nhấn nút [Cập nhật dữ liệu] trực tiếp từ màn
hình này để tải lên các tài liệu huấn luyện mới, giúp Sales Bot nhanh chóng tự học lại
kịch bản và hoạt động chuẩn xác trở lại.
2. Khai thác cơ hội tự động hóa (Automation Opportunity)
● Tình huống: Hệ thống phân tích và phát hiện có 120 email phản hồi từ khách hàng có
mẫu câu tương tự nhau đang được nhân sự xử lý thủ công.
● Hành động nhanh: Người quản lý có thể nhấn nút [Tạo Agent Mới] để tự động thiết lập
một Auto-Reply Agent chuyên trách xử lý các mẫu email này, tiếp tục giải phóng thêm
thời gian làm việc cho đội ngũ nhân viên.
3. Điều chỉnh kịch bản phản hồi

-- 7 of 35 --

● Nếu phát hiện chỉ số hiệu suất của Sales Bot có dấu hiệu sụt giảm nhẹ, người quản lý có
thể click nhanh để cấu hình lại kịch bản phản hồi hoặc điều chỉnh thanh trượt thời gian
trễ (Delay time) để tạo cảm giác AI đang trả lời tự nhiên nhất như một nhân viên thật.
B. Nhân sự:
1. Sơ đồ tổ chức (Phân hệ Nhân sự)
Mục tiêu / Vai trò chính
Sơ đồ tổ chức là nền tảng cốt lõi định hình toàn bộ bộ máy vận hành của doanh nghiệp. Tab này
trực quan hóa cơ cấu phòng ban và phân cấp nhân sự theo thời gian thực, thiết lập luồng báo
cáo rõ ràng và tạo ra bệ đỡ vững chắc trước khi tiến hành giao việc (KPI) hay tổ chức đào tạo.

-- 8 of 35 --

Nỗi đau giải quyết (Pain point matching)
● Chồng chéo trách nhiệm và tranh chấp quyền hạn: Định vị rõ ràng vị trí và phạm vi
công việc của từng người, triệt tiêu tình trạng đùn đẩy trách nhiệm giữa các phòng ban.
● Luồng báo cáo bị rối loạn (Reporting lines bị lỗi): Nhân viên luôn biết chính xác mình
cần báo cáo công việc cho ai và cấp quản lý trực tiếp của mình là ai, loại bỏ các bước
trung gian không cần thiết.
● Tái cấu trúc cồng kềnh, chậm trễ: Thay thế hoàn toàn việc vẽ sơ đồ thủ công trên
PowerPoint hay xuất bản PDF cứng nhắc mỗi khi doanh nghiệp biến động nhân sự.
● Hòa nhập chậm đối với nhân sự mới: Giúp nhân viên mới vào nắm bắt ngay lập tức
sơ đồ chức danh của toàn công ty, biết rõ ai phụ trách mảng nào để chủ động liên hệ
công việc, rút ngắn thời gian thử việc từ vài tuần xuống vài ngày.
Các thông số / Tính năng hiển thị chính (Bức tranh trực quan)
Giao diện sơ đồ tổ chức được thiết kế theo dạng cây thư mục động, trực quan hóa toàn bộ nhân
lực thông qua các thành phần:
1. Hệ thống thẻ nhân sự thông minh
● Thông tin định danh: Hiển thị rõ ảnh đại diện, họ tên và chức danh chính thức (Ví dụ:
Lê Thị B - Giám đốc Công nghệ).
● Trạng thái hoạt động thời gian thực (Real-time status): Giúp CEO và phòng nhân sự
nắm bắt nhanh ai đang trực tuyến hoặc đang làm việc (Ví dụ: tag "Đang hoạt động").
● Thẻ phân loại khối phòng ban: Gán nhãn rõ ràng cho từng nhóm chuyên môn (Ví dụ:
tag "Khối Kỹ Thuật") để dễ dàng chọn lọc nhân sự khi đánh giá KPI hoặc phân bổ nhiệm
vụ lớn.
● Chỉ số báo cáo trực tiếp: Hiển thị số lượng nhân viên cấp dưới trực thuộc quản lý (Ví
dụ: số "3" màu xanh trên thẻ của CEO biểu thị 3 giám đốc khối báo cáo trực tiếp).
2. Bộ công cụ điều hướng và tương tác
● Kéo thả để di chuyển (Drag and Drop): Cho phép nhà quản lý thay đổi cơ cấu nhân sự
hoặc thuyên chuyển phòng ban bằng thao tác kéo thả chuột. Hệ thống sẽ tự động cập
nhật lại luồng báo cáo công việc và tự động phân lại quyền truy cập trên toàn bộ hệ
thống ERP mà không cần thiết lập lại từ đầu.
● Thanh thu phóng (Zoom slider) & Bộ lọc: Giúp phóng to/thu nhỏ sơ đồ và lọc nhanh
theo phòng ban để dễ dàng bao quát cơ cấu kể cả khi quy mô doanh nghiệp lên tới hàng
trăm nhân sự.

-- 9 of 35 --

Hành động tiếp theo (Liên kết vận hành)
Vì sơ đồ tổ chức là cơ sở dữ liệu nền tảng, nhà quản lý có thể tương tác trực tiếp trên các thẻ
nhân sự để điều phối công việc liên phòng ban:
● Kiểm tra công việc tức thì: Nhấp vào một nhân sự trên sơ đồ (Ví dụ: Phạm Văn C -
Trưởng phòng Dev) để hệ thống mở nhanh bảng công việc Kanban của nhân viên đó.
● Giám sát tiến độ học tập: Đi thẳng tới phân hệ Đào tạo của nhân sự được chọn để
đánh giá các khóa học chuyên môn họ đã hoàn thành, phục vụ trực tiếp cho việc xem xét
thăng tiến hoặc điều chỉnh KPI.

-- 10 of 35 --

2. Giao việc (Kanban) (Phân hệ Nhân sự)
Mục tiêu / Vai trò chính
Giao việc (Kanban) là bảng điều khiển hành động trực quan giúp doanh nghiệp tổ chức, phân bổ
và giám sát quá trình thực thi các mục tiêu vận hành và KPI hàng ngày. Công cụ này mang lại
sự minh bạch tuyệt đối về tiến độ công việc, đảm bảo mọi vị trí trong sơ đồ tổ chức đều hoạt
động nhịp nhàng và đúng tiến độ.
Nỗi đau giải quyết (Pain point matching)
● Thất lạc thông tin và trôi tin nhắn: Loại bỏ hoàn toàn tình trạng giao việc lộn xộn qua
các ứng dụng chat cá nhân (Zalo, Messenger) khiến nhân viên bỏ sót đầu việc hoặc
quên lịch hẹn.
● Mất cân bằng khối lượng công việc: Giải quyết bài toán "người làm không hết việc,
người ngồi chơi không có việc", giúp quản lý nắm được tình trạng phân bổ nguồn lực
thực tế của công ty.
● Họp hành báo cáo tiến độ dông dài: Triệt tiêu các cuộc họp rườm rà chỉ để hỏi và trả
lời về trạng thái công việc ("việc này đã làm chưa", "làm đến đâu rồi").
● Chậm trễ tiến độ trong im lặng: Ngăn chặn việc các đầu việc quan trọng bị trễ hạn mà
cấp quản lý không hề hay biết cho đến khi hậu quả xảy ra.
Các thông số / Tính năng hiển thị chính (Bức tranh trực quan)
Bảng giao việc được thiết kế theo mô hình Kanban chuẩn hóa với 3 cột quy trình động và các
thẻ thông tin chi tiết:
1. Ba cột trạng thái công việc (Quy trình từ trái qua phải)
● Cần làm: Nơi lưu trữ các nhiệm vụ đã lên lịch tuyển dụng, đào tạo hoặc đánh giá đang
chờ thực hiện (Ví dụ: Lên kế hoạch tuyển dụng Dev Q3).
● Đang làm: Các công việc đang được nhân sự chủ động xử lý tại thời điểm hiện tại (Ví
dụ: Review KPI quý 2 toàn công ty).
● Hoàn thành: Các nhiệm vụ đã cán đích thành công (Ví dụ: Tổ chức sinh nhật tháng 9),
hiển thị kèm dấu tích xanh để tạo động lực và ghi nhận nỗ lực cho đội ngũ.
2. Thẻ công việc thông minh (Rich Cards)

-- 11 of 35 --

● Nhãn phân loại (Tags): Phân nhóm rõ ràng loại công việc (Ví dụ: nhãn "Tuyển dụng",
"Đào tạo", "Đánh giá") để nhà quản lý dễ dàng đối chiếu xem các hoạt động hàng ngày
có đang đi đúng hướng với các mục tiêu KPI cốt lõi đã giao hay không.
● Cảnh báo trễ hạn & Hạn chót (Deadlines): Các cảnh báo màu đỏ trực quan (Ví dụ:
"Trễ 2 ngày") giúp nhà quản lý nhận diện ngay các "điểm nghẽn" để hỗ trợ kịp thời; các
nhãn thời gian cụ thể (Ví dụ: "14:30 Hôm nay") giúp nhân viên chủ động sắp xếp mức độ
ưu tiên xử lý.
● Thanh tiến độ thực tế (Progress bar): Thể hiện phần trăm hoàn thành của các công
việc dài hạn ngay trên thẻ, giúp nắm bắt nhanh trạng thái mà không cần truy cập sâu vào
chi tiết thẻ.
● Chỉ số thảo luận và cộng tác: Biểu tượng tin nhắn đi kèm con số (Ví dụ: số 4 bình
luận) hiển thị lượng tương tác trực tiếp của nhân viên trên thẻ. Nhân viên và quản lý có
thể thảo luận, đính kèm tài liệu trực tiếp trên thẻ công việc để tránh thất lạc thông tin và
lưu trữ lịch sử xử lý tập trung.
● Avatar nhân sự đảm nhiệm: Hiển thị rõ ảnh đại diện của những nhân viên chịu trách
nhiệm thực thi nhiệm vụ đó.
Hành động tiếp theo (Liên kết vận hành)
● Cập nhật trạng thái bằng kéo thả: Nhân viên chỉ cần kéo và thả thẻ công việc qua các
cột trạng thái khi tiến độ thay đổi để hệ thống tự động cập nhật thời gian thực.
● Thêm công việc nhanh: Quản lý hoặc trưởng nhóm nhấp vào nút + Thêm công việc
ở cuối mỗi cột để tạo nhanh thẻ công việc mới cho nhân viên.
● Tối ưu phân bổ nhân sự: Quản lý đối chiếu các avatar được gán việc trên thẻ với Sơ
đồ tổ chức để phân chia nhiệm vụ đúng vai trò, đúng chuyên môn, tránh giao việc bất
hợp lý hoặc gây quá tải cho một cá nhân.

-- 12 of 35 --

3. Đào tạo (Phân hệ Nhân sự)
Mục tiêu / Vai trò chính
Đào tạo hoạt động như một hệ thống quản lý học tập nội bộ (E-learning) tập trung, có nhiệm vụ
chuẩn hóa năng lực chuyên môn, kỹ năng mềm và tư duy vận hành của toàn bộ đội ngũ. Phân
hệ này là công cụ cốt lõi để xây dựng tính đồng bộ trong công việc, giúp mọi nhân viên vận hành
hệ thống đúng quy chuẩn và không ngừng nâng cấp bản thân.
Nỗi đau giải quyết (Pain point matching)
● Vận hành manh mún, thiếu quy chuẩn: Khắc phục triệt để tình trạng "mỗi người làm
việc một kiểu theo thói quen cũ" bằng cách đồng bộ hóa năng lực xử lý công việc qua
các bài giảng tiêu chuẩn.
● Quy trình Onboarding thủ công tốn kém thời gian: Giải phóng thời gian đứng lớp lặp
đi lặp lại của cấp quản lý khi có nhân sự mới gia nhập doanh nghiệp.

-- 13 of 35 --

● Sử dụng sai lệch hoặc lãng phí tài nguyên công nghệ: Ngăn chặn các lỗi vận hành
do nhân viên không biết cách đọc báo cáo, khai thác dashboard hay hiểu sai lệch dữ liệu
của phần mềm ERP mới.
Các thông số / Tính năng hiển thị chính (Bức tranh trực quan)
Giao diện quản lý học tập hiển thị trực quan các khóa học chuyên đề dưới dạng thẻ thông tin
(Course Cards):
1. Thẻ khóa học trực quan
● Nội dung khóa học chi tiết: Hiển thị rõ tên khóa học, mô tả ngắn gọn và hình ảnh minh
họa chuyên nghiệp (Ví dụ: Khóa học Văn hóa Doanh nghiệp iGen, Phân tích Dữ liệu Cơ
bản).
● Nhãn định hướng học tập (Tags): Phân định mức độ ưu tiên của khóa học bằng các
nhãn trực quan (Ví dụ: nhãn đỏ "Bắt buộc" đối với các chương trình onboarding, hoặc
nhãn "Kỹ năng mềm" đối với các kỹ năng phát triển bản thân).
● Thanh Tiến độ tổng thể (Progress bar): Thể hiện trực quan tỷ lệ hoàn thành trung bình
của toàn doanh nghiệp đối với khóa học đó (Ví dụ: Tiến độ tổng thể đạt 85%, 42%).
● Số lượng nhân sự đang học: Hiển thị số lượng nhân viên thực tế đang tích cực tham
gia khóa học (Ví dụ: "124 nhân viên đang học", "86 nhân viên đang học", "215 nhân viên
đang học") để người điều hành giám sát bầu không khí học tập trong công ty.
Hành động tiếp theo (Sự liên kết tự động / Call to action)
Hệ thống Đào tạo được thiết kế liên kết tự động chặt chẽ với các tab còn lại trong phân hệ Nhân
sự để tối ưu hóa quy trình quản trị:
● Tự động hóa luồng Onboarding nhân sự mới: Khi phòng nhân sự thêm một nhân
viên mới vào Sơ đồ tổ chức, hệ thống ERP sẽ tự động gán khóa học "Văn hóa doanh
nghiệp" vào tài khoản học tập của họ.
● Tự động đẩy việc sang Kanban: Đồng thời, hệ thống tự động thiết lập và đẩy một thẻ
công việc với nội dung "Học văn hóa doanh nghiệp" sang bảng Giao việc Kanban của
nhân sự đó kèm theo thời hạn hoàn thành cụ thể để cấp quản lý theo dõi sát sao.
● Căn cứ đánh giá năng lực nâng cấp bản thân: CEO và phòng nhân sự có thể định kỳ
kiểm tra tiến độ học tập và tỷ lệ hoàn thành các khóa học nghiệp vụ để làm cơ sở dữ liệu
khách quan cho việc xem xét thăng tiến, tăng lương hoặc khen thưởng cuối năm.

-- 14 of 35 --

C. Kho & sản phẩm
1. Danh mục (Phân hệ Kho & Sản phẩm)
Mục tiêu / Vai trò chính
Tab Danh mục là cơ sở dữ liệu gốc quản lý toàn bộ dải sản phẩm của doanh nghiệp. Điểm đặc
biệt của phân hệ này là khả năng hợp nhất quản trị đồng thời cả sản phẩm vật lý (phần cứng,
thiết bị) và sản phẩm dịch vụ/phần mềm (thuê bao, gói điện toán đám mây) trên một giao diện
duy nhất, đặt nền móng cho việc theo dõi xuất nhập kho và lập kế hoạch cung ứng.

-- 15 of 35 --

Nỗi đau giải quyết (Pain point matching)
● Quản lý dữ liệu phân mảnh: Loại bỏ hoàn toàn sự bất tiện khi phải dùng các phần
mềm riêng biệt (một bên để theo dõi số lượng tồn kho vật lý, một bên để kiểm tra thời
hạn và số lượng thuê bao dịch vụ).
● Đối soát tài chính phức tạp: Đồng bộ hóa số liệu bán đứt sản phẩm và dòng tiền định
kỳ từ thuê bao, giúp bộ phận kế toán đối soát doanh thu đa nguồn nhanh chóng mà
không cần tổng hợp thủ công từ nhiều hệ thống.
● Mất cơ hội bán hàng do đứt gãy nguồn cung: Ngăn chặn tình trạng các mặt hàng bán
chạy đột ngột về mức tồn kho bằng 0 mà bộ phận thu mua không nhận được thông tin
kịp thời.
Các thông số / Tính năng hiển thị chính (Bức tranh trực quan)
Giao diện Danh mục được thiết kế dưới dạng các thẻ sản phẩm thông minh (Product Cards)
hiển thị trực quan thông tin đặc thù của từng nhóm sản phẩm:
1. Thẻ thông tin sản phẩm hỗn hợp
● Nhãn phân loại mô hình (Tags): Gán nhãn phân biệt rõ ràng giữa sản phẩm "Vật lý" và
sản phẩm "Dịch vụ/Phần mềm" để doanh nghiệp dễ dàng phân loại danh mục đầu tư.
● Chỉ số đo lường đặc thù:
○ Đối với hàng vật lý: Hiển thị chỉ số "Tồn kho" thực tế (Ví dụ: tồn 1,240 cái đối với
Thiết bị đeo thông minh).
○ Đối với hàng dịch vụ/phần mềm: Hiển thị chỉ số "Active Subs" (Ví dụ: 8,500
thuê bao đang hoạt động đối với Cloud Storage) để đo lường dòng tiền thuê bao
định kỳ.
● Cảnh báo tồn kho đỏ trực quan: Khi một mặt hàng vật lý chạm ngưỡng tối thiểu (Ví dụ:
Bàn phím cơ Workspace chỉ còn tồn 18 cái), hệ thống sẽ tự động kích hoạt nhãn đỏ
"Sắp hết" kèm biểu tượng cảnh báo nguy hiểm màu đỏ để bộ phận thu mua chú ý ngay
lập tức.
2. Biểu tượng lối tắt điều hướng nhanh
● Mỗi thẻ sản phẩm được trang bị một nút mũi tên hướng lên ở góc dưới bên phải, hoạt
động như một cổng kết nối nhanh đến các luồng vận hành khác trong phân hệ Kho.
Hành động tiếp theo (Liên kết vận hành / Call to action)

-- 16 of 35 --

Khi phát hiện sản phẩm ở trạng thái cảnh báo "Sắp hết" ngay tại giao diện Danh mục này, người
quản lý chỉ cần click vào biểu tượng mũi tên điều hướng để thực hiện nhanh hai tác vụ:
● Tạo phiếu nhập kho tức thì: Hệ thống chuyển hướng nhanh sang tab Nhập/Xuất và tự
động điền thông tin sản phẩm để hoàn tất phiếu nhập hàng thô, rút ngắn quy trình xử lý
giấy tờ.
● Dự báo nhu cầu trước khi mua hàng: Chuyển sang tab Dự báo AI để phân tích biểu
đồ dự đoán nhu cầu thị trường đối với sản phẩm này trong 30 ngày tới, giúp người quản
lý đưa ra quyết định nhập số lượng hàng chính xác nhất, tránh đọng vốn hoặc thiếu
hàng.

-- 17 of 35 --

2. Nhập/xuất (Phân hệ Kho & Sản phẩm)
Mục tiêu / Vai trò chính
Nhập/xuất là bảng ghi nhận lịch sử mọi biến động xuất nhập kho theo thời gian thực. Phân hệ
này cung cấp một điểm kiểm soát duy nhất cho toàn bộ luồng hàng hóa đi vào (nhập hàng từ
nhà cung cấp, hàng khách trả) và đi ra (xuất hàng bán lẻ, xuất đơn đại lý), đảm bảo tính minh
bạch của số liệu tồn kho thực tế so với sổ sách kế toán.
Nỗi đau giải quyết (Pain point matching)
● Thất thoát hàng hóa không rõ nguyên nhân: Loại bỏ tình trạng hao hụt hàng hóa
trong kho mà không tìm ra người chịu trách nhiệm hoặc thời điểm xảy ra lỗi.
● Đơn hàng bị kẹt trong luồng xử lý: Khắc phục sự thiếu giám sát khiến các đơn xuất
kho của đại lý hoặc khách hàng bị chậm trễ mà quản lý không hay biết.
● Số liệu tồn kho thực tế bị lệch lệch sổ sách: Tránh sự sai sót khi ghi chép sổ sách thủ
công, giúp dữ liệu kho khớp chính xác với dòng tiền thực tế.
● Quy trình xử lý hàng hoàn trả phức tạp: Giải quyết sự bất tiện khi phải theo dõi hàng
lỗi, hàng khách trả ở một bảng tính riêng biệt, dễ dẫn đến bỏ sót dữ liệu.
Các thông số / Tính năng hiển thị chính (Bức tranh trực quan)
Giao diện Nhập/xuất được trình bày dưới dạng danh sách dòng thời gian (Time-log) của các
phiếu kho với đầy đủ thông tin định danh:
1. Nhật ký phiếu kho thời gian thực
● Mã phiếu và thông tin chi tiết: Ghi nhận rõ mã định danh (Ví dụ: NK-2401, XK-2405),
danh mục hàng hóa đi kèm (Ví dụ: iPhone 15 Pro Max, MacBook Pro M3...) và mốc thời
gian xử lý cụ thể.
● Biến động số lượng trực quan: Hiển thị số lượng thay đổi bằng mã màu rõ ràng:
○ Số màu xanh lá biểu thị lượng hàng tăng lên (Ví dụ: nhập kho mới +250 sp
hoặc hàng trả về +2 sp).
○ Số màu đỏ biểu thị lượng hàng giảm đi (Ví dụ: xuất kho -45 sp hoặc -12 sp).
● Nhãn trạng thái xử lý (Status Badges):
○ Trạng thái "Hoàn thành" màu xanh biểu thị giao dịch kho đã kết thúc an toàn.
○ Trạng thái "Đang xử lý" màu cam cảnh báo giao dịch chưa hoàn tất. Lợi ích:
Giúp nhà quản lý phát hiện ra ngay lập tức các đơn xuất kho lớn (Ví dụ: Đơn đại

-- 18 of 35 --

lý Hà Nội XK-2405) vẫn đang bị kẹt ở trạng thái "Đang xử lý" từ hôm qua để kịp
thời thúc giục nhân viên đóng gói, đảm bảo giao hàng đúng hẹn cho đối tác.
Hành động tiếp theo (Liên kết vận hành / Call to action)
Hệ thống hỗ trợ thao tác nhanh để chuẩn hóa quy trình làm việc thông qua liên kết dữ liệu liên
phòng ban:
● Tối ưu hóa quy trình tạo phiếu mới: Khi người dùng click vào nút "+ Tạo phiếu", hệ
thống sẽ tự động gợi ý tên/mã sản phẩm từ tab Danh mục và tự động đồng bộ thông tin
khách hàng/nhà cung cấp từ phân hệ Sales CRM. Việc này giúp giảm thiểu tối đa việc
gõ tay thủ công, tránh gây sai lệch số liệu kho và hóa đơn.
● Tự động hóa xử lý hàng khách hoàn trả: Ghi nhận trực tiếp luồng hàng hoàn trả từ
khách hàng làm tăng số lượng tồn kho thực tế (Ví dụ: Phiếu NK-2400 cộng +2 sp). Hệ
thống ngay lập tức cộng ngược số lượng vào kho thực tế và đồng bộ dữ liệu với bộ phận
kế toán/chăm sóc khách hàng mà không cần quy trình đối soát giấy tờ phức tạp.
● Giải quyết điểm nghẽn giao hàng: Thường xuyên lọc trạng thái "Đang xử lý" để phát
hiện và xử lý sớm các đơn hàng bị trì hoãn, nâng cao chất lượng dịch vụ của doanh
nghiệp.

-- 19 of 35 --

3. Dự báo AI (Phân hệ Kho & Sản phẩm)
Mục tiêu / Vai trò chính
Tab Dự báo AI đóng vai trò là bộ não phân tích và dự đoán nhu cầu thị trường của hệ thống kho
vận. Thay vì quản lý kho thụ động theo kiểu đợi hết hàng mới mua, phân hệ này sử dụng dữ liệu
lịch sử xuất nhập kho kết hợp với thuật toán AI để dự báo trước dòng tiền nhập hàng, tối ưu hóa
định mức lưu kho và đưa ra các đề xuất điều phối thông minh.
Nỗi đau giải quyết (Pain point matching)
● Đọng vốn lưu động do tồn kho khó bán: Khắc phục tình trạng doanh nghiệp nhập
thừa các mặt hàng đang giảm nhu cầu, làm gián đoạn dòng tiền và tăng chi phí thuê kho
bãi.
● Mất cơ hội doanh thu do đứt hàng bán chạy: Tránh việc bỏ lỡ các đợt cao điểm bán
hàng (Ví dụ: mùa tựu trường, lễ tết) do không ước tính được nhu cầu tăng vọt của thị
trường.

-- 20 of 35 --

● Dự trữ và thu mua bằng cảm tính: Loại bỏ hoàn toàn phương pháp ước lượng số
lượng hàng cần nhập bằng kinh nghiệm cá nhân vốn dễ dẫn đến sai sót và lãng phí
nguồn lực.
Các thông số / Tính năng hiển thị chính (Bức tranh trực quan)
Giao diện Dự báo AI được chia làm hai phân khu chính: Phân tích nguy cơ và Đề xuất tối ưu
hóa hành động thực tế.
1. Cảnh báo nguy cơ hết hàng & Biểu đồ dự báo nhu cầu
● Hệ thống Cảnh báo hết hàng tự động:
○ Hiển thị danh sách các sản phẩm đang có nguy cơ cạn kho (Ví dụ: Laptop Dell
XPS 15, Màn hình LG 27" 4K).
○ Hệ thống tự động tính toán tốc độ tiêu thụ hàng ngày thực tế (Ví dụ: tiêu thụ 4
cái/ngày) để tính chính xác số ngày còn lại (Ví dụ: 3 ngày nữa hết hàng). Lợi
ích: Giúp doanh nghiệp thích ứng linh hoạt với nhịp độ bán hàng thực tế, tránh
cảnh báo ảo đối với hàng bán chậm và ngăn rủi ro đứt hàng đối với các sản
phẩm bỗng dưng bán chạy.
● Biểu đồ Dự báo nhu cầu (30 ngày tới):
○ Đường nét đứt màu xám hiển thị dữ liệu quá khứ, vạch xanh đứng biểu thị mốc
"Hôm nay", và đường nét liền màu xanh cyan thể hiện dự đoán nhu cầu của AI
trong tương lai. Lợi ích: Giúp nhà quản lý nắm bắt trước xu hướng thị trường để
chuẩn bị trước kế hoạch tài chính.
2. Đề xuất tối ưu hóa từ AI (Hành động thực tế)
Hệ thống tự động đề xuất 3 nhóm hành động cụ thể để bảo vệ dòng tiền:
● Giảm số lượng đặt hàng (Giảm đọng vốn): Nhận diện xu hướng giảm cầu (Ví dụ: Tai
nghe Bluetooth X1) và đề xuất giảm 30% lượng nhập lần tới để tiết kiệm chi phí lưu kho.
● Đặt hàng ngay (Tối đa hóa doanh thu): Đón đầu xu hướng tăng cầu cục bộ (Ví dụ:
Bàn phím cơ K2 dự kiến tăng 45% do mùa tựu trường) và đề xuất số lượng nhập chính
xác để tránh cháy hàng.
● Tái phân bổ kho (Tối ưu hóa nguồn lực sẵn có): Đề xuất điều chuyển hàng nội bộ
giữa các chi nhánh (Ví dụ: chuyển 50 chuột không dây từ Kho Tổng về Chi nhánh Quận
1) để đáp ứng nhu cầu tăng cao cục bộ, tránh việc phải bỏ tiền túi ra nhập mới khi kho
tổng vẫn còn hàng dư.
Hành động tiếp theo (Liên kết vận hành / Call to action)

-- 21 of 35 --

Mỗi đề xuất tối ưu hóa của AI đều được tích hợp các lối tắt hành động liên kết trực tiếp với các
phân hệ khác:
● Tự động lập đơn mua hàng nháp: Khi người dùng click vào nút "Tạo đơn đặt hàng" ở
đề xuất mua hàng gấp, hệ thống sẽ tự động tạo một phiếu mua hàng nháp với số lượng
được AI tính toán sẵn, đồng bộ trực tiếp sang tab Nhập/xuất để duyệt gửi nhà cung cấp.
● Tự động thiết lập lệnh chuyển kho: Click vào nút "Xem kế hoạch chuyển" tại đề xuất
tái phân bổ kho sẽ tự động tạo ngay lệnh điều chuyển kho nội bộ giữa các chi nhánh,
nhân viên kho chỉ cần đóng gói và vận chuyển theo chỉ dẫn.
● Cập nhật hạn mức lưu kho: Click "Áp dụng đề xuất" để hệ thống tự động ghi nhận
định mức lưu kho mới cho các sản phẩm đang giảm cầu, thắt chặt việc chi tiêu nhập
hàng trong đợt tiếp theo.

-- 22 of 35 --

D. Marketing
1. Lên ý tưởng AI (Phân hệ Marketing)
Mục tiêu / Vai trò chính
Tab Lên ý tưởng AI hoạt động như một phòng nghiên cứu và sáng tạo chiến dịch thông minh cho
doanh nghiệp. Phân hệ này hỗ trợ người dùng chuyển đổi các mục tiêu kinh doanh thô sơ hoặc
các chủ đề tiếp thị chung thành các ý tưởng chiến dịch chi tiết, có cấu trúc nội dung rõ ràng và
phân nhóm kênh cụ thể trước khi tiến hành viết bài chi tiết.
Nỗi đau giải quyết (Pain point matching)
● Hội chứng bí ý tưởng (Writer's block): Loại bỏ rào cản tâm lý khi bắt đầu một chiến
dịch tiếp thị mới từ một trang giấy trắng, giúp tìm ra các góc tiếp cận (angles) mới lạ chỉ
trong vài giây.
● Thời gian thảo luận kéo dài vô hạn: Giúp các phòng ban nhanh chóng thống nhất
concept chủ đạo dựa trên các bản nháp thực tế, rút ngắn quy trình phê duyệt ý tưởng từ
nhiều ngày xuống vài phút.
● Nội dung đăng tải bị manh mún, rời rạc: Đảm bảo tất cả các bài đăng trên các kênh
mạng xã hội luôn đi theo một thông điệp cốt lõi thống nhất của chiến dịch chung.
Các thông số / Tính năng hiển thị chính (Bức tranh trực quan)
Giao diện Lên ý tưởng AI được thiết kế chia làm hai khâu rõ ràng: Đầu vào khởi tạo và Kết quả
gợi ý có cấu trúc.
1. Bộ công cụ đầu vào (Khởi tạo chiến dịch mới)
● Hộp nhập liệu mô tả: Nơi người dùng nhập nhanh mục tiêu tiếp thị dưới dạng ngôn ngữ
tự nhiên (Ví dụ: Lên chiến dịch ra mắt sản phẩm giày chạy bộ mới dành cho người mới
bắt đầu...).
● Gợi ý nhanh (Quick Prompts): Các lối tắt đề xuất sẵn các chủ đề tiếp thị phổ biến (Ví
dụ: "Giảm giá cuối năm", "Tái định vị thương hiệu") để khởi động buổi brainstorm nhanh
chóng.
2. Cột đề xuất khung xương nội dung (Content Pillars Đề xuất)

-- 23 of 35 --

● AI tự động phân tích mục tiêu đầu vào để đề xuất ra các trụ cột nội dung cốt lõi của chiến
dịch (Ví dụ: Giáo dục & Hướng dẫn, Câu chuyện khách hàng, Ưu đãi & Khuyến mãi). Lợi
ích: Giúp doanh nghiệp định hình khung nội dung (framework) chuẩn chỉnh ngay từ đầu;
đảm bảo tỷ lệ nội dung phân bổ đa dạng, tránh việc chỉ đăng bài bán hàng gây nhàm
chán và mất tương tác.
3. Danh sách Bản nháp Ý tưởng (Concept Drafts)
● Hiển thị các phương án chiến dịch khác nhau dưới dạng các thẻ thông tin chi tiết:
○ Điểm số Độ phù hợp (Relevance Score): Đánh giá mức độ hiệu quả dự kiến
dựa trên đối tượng mục tiêu (Ví dụ: Độ phù hợp 92%, 88%, 75%). Lợi ích: Giúp
nhà quản lý nhanh chóng sàng lọc và ưu tiên thử nghiệm những ý tưởng có khả
năng chuyển đổi cao nhất.
○ Nhãn gợi ý định dạng kênh (Channel Tags): Gợi ý kênh xuất bản tối ưu nhất
cho từng ý tưởng (Ví dụ: ý tưởng này nên làm Video Ngắn cho Tiktok, ý tưởng
kia nên chạy Facebook Ads hoặc làm Email Marketing để tối ưu hóa ngân sách).
●
Hành động tiếp theo (Liên kết vận hành / Call to action)
Hệ thống cho phép chuyển đổi tức thì từ ý tưởng trừu tượng sang bản viết nháp chi tiết để
chuẩn hóa quy trình làm việc:
● Tự động hóa luồng sản xuất nội dung chi tiết: Khi người dùng chọn một phương án
ưng ý (Ví dụ: Concept A - "Bước chạy nhẹ nhàng") và click nút [Phát triển tiếp] ở góc
dưới thẻ, AI sẽ tự động lập dàn ý và viết nháp toàn bộ các bài đăng chi tiết cho từng
kênh. Sau đó, hệ thống đẩy trực tiếp các bài nháp này sang tab Duyệt nội dung để cấp
quản lý phê duyệt, loại bỏ hoàn toàn bước sao chép thủ công.
● Lọc bỏ ý tưởng kém hiệu quả: Click biểu tượng thùng rác để xóa nhanh các bản nháp
có độ phù hợp thấp, giữ cho không gian làm việc luôn gọn gàng.

-- 24 of 35 --

2. Duyệt nội dung (Phân hệ Marketing)
Mục tiêu / Vai trò chính
Tab Duyệt nội dung hoạt động như một trung tâm biên tập và kiểm soát chất lượng truyền thông
đa kênh. Tại đây, cấp quản lý có thể giám sát toàn bộ các bài viết do AI tạo ra, tiến hành duyệt
nhanh và lập lịch tự động phát hành lên các nền tảng mạng xã hội thực tế mà không cần thao
tác thủ công phức tạp.
Nỗi đau giải quyết (Pain point matching)
● Quy trình sửa đổi và duyệt bài thủ công chồng chéo: Loại bỏ tình trạng bài viết nháp
bị gửi qua gửi lại nhiều lần qua Email hay các ứng dụng chat (Zalo, Viber) gây trôi thông
tin và thất lạc phiên bản chỉnh sửa mới nhất.
● Ách tắc khâu kiểm duyệt gây lỡ giờ vàng: Khắc phục sự chậm trễ khi đăng bài do
người quản lý bận rộn, đảm bảo các bài viết tiếp thị luôn được xuất bản đúng khung giờ
có lượt tương tác cao nhất hoặc bắt kịp các xu hướng nóng hổi.

-- 25 of 35 --

● Tốn thời gian đăng bài thủ công lên từng nền tảng: Giải phóng nhân viên Marketing
khỏi việc phải canh giờ để đăng nhập vào từng tài khoản mạng xã hội riêng biệt để đăng
bài.
Các thông số / Tính năng hiển thị chính (Bức tranh trực quan)
Giao diện Duyệt nội dung được thiết kế theo dạng bảng quy trình (Kanban) chia làm 3 cột trạng
thái rõ ràng:
1. Cột "Bản nháp (AI tạo)" (Column 1)
● Nơi lưu trữ các bài viết thô do hệ thống tự động tạo ra dựa trên các ý tưởng đã chọn ở
tab Lên ý tưởng AI (Ví dụ: bài viết Facebook về giải pháp ERP bán lẻ, kịch bản Tiktok
về 3 lỗi quản lý kho).
● Nút "+ Prompt AI tạo thêm": Hoạt động như một trợ lý viết bài 24/7. Marketers có thể
nhanh chóng ra lệnh cho AI viết thêm các bài viết mới hoặc thay đổi các góc tiếp cận
(hooks) khác bằng các câu lệnh đơn giản trực tiếp tại đây.
2. Cột "Chờ quản lý duyệt" (Column 2)
● Nơi lưu giữ các bài viết đã hoàn thiện cấu trúc và hình ảnh minh họa, chờ quản lý thông
qua.
● Hệ thống phê duyệt 1-Click: Mỗi thẻ bài viết được trang bị nút [Phê duyệt] màu xanh
cyan và nút từ chối [X] màu đỏ. Lợi ích: Giúp người duyệt bài loại bỏ hoàn toàn việc
phải tải file Word hay sửa đổi lỉnh kỉnh. Quản lý có thể xem nhanh, duyệt hoặc từ chối bài
viết ngay trên một màn hình duy nhất chỉ với 1 lượt nhấp chuột, giúp rút ngắn chu kỳ
phát hành nội dung đa kênh từ vài ngày xuống vài phút.
3. Cột "Đã lên lịch xuất bản" (Column 3)
● Hiển thị danh sách các bài viết đã được phê duyệt và xếp hàng chờ đăng tải, đi kèm
nhãn mốc thời gian cụ thể (Ví dụ: 15:00 Hôm nay).
Hành động tiếp theo (Liên kết vận hành / Call to action)
Quy trình phê duyệt tại tab này được kết nối tự động với hệ thống đăng tải của ERP để đảm bảo
tần suất xuất hiện thương hiệu đồng đều:
● Tự động hóa xuất bản đa nền tảng (Auto-publishing): Ngay sau khi quản lý nhấn nút
[Phê duyệt], bài viết sẽ chuyển sang trạng thái chờ đăng. Khi đến đúng ngày giờ đã
hẹn, hệ thống sẽ tự động đăng tải bài viết trực tiếp lên các nền tảng mạng xã hội thực tế
(Facebook, TikTok, LinkedIn) mà không cần sự can thiệp thủ công của nhân viên.

-- 26 of 35 --

● Yêu cầu AI viết lại nhanh chóng: Nếu nội dung bản nháp ở cột 1 chưa đạt yêu cầu,
nhân viên có thể sử dụng nút "+ Prompt AI tạo thêm" để AI hiệu chỉnh lại câu từ ngay
lập tức.
● Tối ưu hóa quản trị chiến dịch: Sử dụng bộ lọc "Lọc chiến dịch" ở góc trên bên phải để
lọc nhanh và kiểm duyệt đồng bộ các bài đăng thuộc cùng một chiến dịch tiếp thị lớn.
3. Lịch đăng (Phân hệ Marketing)
Mục tiêu / Vai trò chính
Tab Lịch đăng đóng vai trò là bảng lịch biên tập nội dung (Content Calendar) trung tâm của toàn
doanh nghiệp. Phân hệ này trực quan hóa kế hoạch phát hành nội dung đa nền tảng theo dạng
lưới lịch thân thiện, giúp đội ngũ tiếp thị dễ dàng kiểm soát tần suất, nhịp độ truyền thông và đảm
bảo thương hiệu luôn xuất hiện đúng, đủ, đều trước mắt công chúng.

-- 27 of 35 --

Nỗi đau giải quyết (Pain point matching)
● Tần suất đăng bài không đều đặn: Loại bỏ thói quen đăng bài ngẫu hứng theo kiểu
"ngày nắng ngày mưa", duy trì tương tác ổn định và giúp các tài khoản mạng xã hội
không bị thuật toán bóp phân phối.
● Bỏ sót các khoảng trống nội dung: Giúp phát hiện ra các ngày bị trống lịch đăng trong
tháng để kịp thời bổ sung bài viết, đảm bảo tính liên tục của mạch thông tin.
● Thiếu bao quát chiến dịch dài hạn: Khắc phục sự bất tiện khi phải quản lý lịch đăng
của từng mạng xã hội ở các trang riêng biệt, giúp nhà quản lý có cái nhìn tổng thể về
toàn bộ chiến dịch trong tháng.
Các thông số / Tính năng hiển thị chính (Bức tranh trực quan)
Bảng lịch biên tập được thiết kế trực quan và linh hoạt với các phân khu điều hành cụ thể:
1. Bảng lịch đa kênh trực quan (Monthly Grid)
● Cách bố trí thân thiện: Hiển thị dưới dạng lưới lịch của tháng (Ví dụ: Tháng 10, 2023)
được phân chia theo các thứ trong tuần (T2, T3... CN).
● Trực quan hóa đa kênh qua logo: Các bài viết được gán biểu tượng của từng mạng xã
hội cụ thể (Ví dụ: icon ngón tay Facebook của bài đăng ngày 3/10, icon nút Play TikTok
của bài đăng ngày 4/10). Lợi ích: Giúp người quản lý kiểm soát tỷ lệ phân bổ nội dung
đa kênh chỉ trong 3 giây; đảm bảo sự xuất hiện đồng đều của thương hiệu trên mọi mặt
trận mạng xã hội và dễ dàng cân đối giữa các định dạng nội dung khác nhau (ảnh, video,
bài viết chuyên sâu).
● Chỉ số số lượng bài đăng: Hiển thị vòng tròn số lượng bài đăng trong ngày (Ví dụ: số
"4" màu xanh trên ô ngày 4/10 biểu thị có 4 nội dung đã được lên lịch).
2. Hệ thống tùy chọn chế độ xem linh hoạt (Góc trên bên phải)
Hệ thống cung cấp 3 chế độ xem đáp ứng nhu cầu của từng vai trò quản lý:
● Chế độ xem Tháng: Giúp CEO/Quản lý bao quát toàn bộ chiến dịch lớn trong tháng để
xem nhịp độ truyền thông có bị ngắt quãng hay không.
● Chế độ xem Tuần: Giúp Trưởng nhóm rà soát kỹ các khung giờ đăng chi tiết trong ngày
để tối ưu hóa tương tác của khán giả.
● Chế độ xem Danh sách: Giúp nhân viên Marketing dễ dàng theo dõi, kiểm tra lại nội
dung chữ viết (copy) và hình ảnh đính kèm trước khi hệ thống tự động xuất bản.
3. Bảng nhắc việc "Sắp diễn ra" (Màn hình dưới cùng)

-- 28 of 35 --

● Một phân khu danh sách nằm ngay dưới bảng lịch lớn, ghi nhận các bài viết chuẩn bị lên
sóng.
Hành động tiếp theo (Liên kết vận hành / Call to action)
Bảng lịch đăng là điểm chạm cuối cùng kết nối kế hoạch truyền thông với hành động vận hành
thực tế:
● Tự động hóa xuất bản đa kênh: Sau khi bài viết được phê duyệt ở tab Duyệt nội
dung, thông tin sẽ tự động hiển thị trên Lịch đăng. Khi đến đúng giờ hẹn, hệ thống ERP
sẽ tự động đăng tải bài viết trực tiếp lên Facebook, TikTok hay LinkedIn mà không cần
nhân viên phải thao tác tay.
● Phối hợp chuẩn bị tài nguyên media: Đội ngũ thiết kế hình ảnh (Designer) và dựng
phim (Video Editor) sử dụng mục "Sắp diễn ra" như một bảng nhắc việc thông minh để
biết chính xác những bài viết nào sắp lên sóng, từ đó ưu tiên hoàn thiện tài nguyên
media chất lượng cao sẵn sàng trước giờ đăng.
● Cân đối chiến dịch dài hạn: Quản lý di chuyển qua lại giữa chế độ xem Tháng và Tuần
để liên tục rà soát lịch trống, nhanh chóng click trực tiếp vào ô ngày trống trên lịch để bổ
sung nhanh bài viết mới từ tab ý tưởng.

-- 29 of 35 --

E. Sales CRM
1. Phễu Khách hàng (Phân hệ Sales
CRM)
Mục tiêu / Vai trò chính
Tab Phễu Khách hàng là bảng điều khiển trực quan giúp doanh nghiệp phân loại toàn bộ tệp
khách hàng tiềm năng theo 3 mức độ nhiệt độ: Khách Lạnh, Khách Ấm, và Khách Nóng. Phân
hệ này giúp đội ngũ kinh doanh xác định chính xác mức độ ưu tiên chăm sóc, bám sát các cơ
hội bán hàng có giá trị lớn và tự động hóa các hành động chốt hợp đồng.
Nỗi đau giải quyết (Pain point matching)
● Không chăm sóc khách hàng kịp thời: Khắc phục tình trạng nhân viên sales bị quá tải
thông tin, bỏ quên các khách hàng "Nóng" khiến họ nguội đi do không gọi điện bám sát
kịp thời.

-- 30 of 35 --

● Lãng phí thời gian vào nhóm khách sai phân khúc: Tránh việc nhân viên dành quá
nhiều thời gian tư vấn cho nhóm khách "Lạnh" chưa sẵn sàng mua, gây giảm hiệu suất
chung của cả đội ngũ.
● Mất dấu vết và lịch sử tương tác: Giải quyết việc không rõ mỗi giao dịch đang tắc
nghẽn ở bước nào, làm giảm tỷ lệ chốt hợp đồng thành công.
Các thông số / Tính năng hiển thị chính (Bức tranh trực quan)
Phễu bán hàng được thiết kế trực quan theo mô hình cột Kanban phân cấp rõ ràng:
1. Ba cột phân loại nhiệt độ khách hàng (Lạnh - Ấm - Nóng)
● Khách Lạnh (Cold Lead): Nhóm khách hàng mới tiếp cận, nhu cầu chưa rõ ràng (Ví dụ:
Lê Thị B - Công ty TNHH ABC).
● Khách Ấm (Warm Lead): Khách hàng đã nhận diện thương hiệu, có tương tác ban đầu
(Ví dụ: Phạm Thị D - XYZ Corp).
● Khách Nóng (Hot Lead): Khách hàng có nhu cầu mua cao nhất, chuẩn bị ký kết hợp
đồng (Ví dụ: Nguyễn Văn A - Global Tech, được làm nổi bật bằng khung viền xanh chủ
động).
2. Thẻ tiềm năng thông minh (Lead Cards)
● Giá trị đơn hàng dự kiến: Hiển thị rõ số tiền ước tính của thương vụ (Ví dụ:
15.000.000đ, 25.000.000đ, Chưa rõ). Lợi ích: Giúp Sales Manager và CEO nhận
diện ngay các hợp đồng giá trị lớn đang ở trạng thái nhạy cảm để ưu tiên bám sát và hỗ
trợ chốt đơn kịp thời.
● Mốc thời gian tương tác gần nhất: Ghi nhận chính xác mốc thời gian cập nhật thông
tin (Ví dụ: "2 giờ trước", "Hôm qua", "3 ngày trước"). Lợi ích: Phát hiện ngay các cơ hội
bán hàng bị "bỏ quên" quá lâu để kịp thời phân bổ nhân sự chăm sóc lại, tránh đứt gãy
tương tác.
● Nhãn tiến độ chi tiết (Touchpoint Badges): Hiển thị rõ bước xử lý hiện tại (Ví dụ: nhãn
"Đã gửi báo giá", hoặc nhãn đỏ "Sắp chốt HD"). Lợi ích: Giúp nhà quản lý nắm được
chính xác mỗi giao dịch đang tắc nghẽn ở bước nào để đưa ra chỉ đạo hành động trực
tiếp.
Hành động tiếp theo (Liên kết vận hành / Call to action)
Phễu Khách hàng hoạt động như một hệ thống kích hoạt tự động các kịch bản tương tác đa
kênh:

-- 31 of 35 --

● Đồng bộ trạng thái sang Omni-Inbox: Khi nhân viên sales kéo thả thẻ khách hàng trên
Phễu (Ví dụ: di chuyển từ Khách Ấm sang Khách Nóng), hệ thống sẽ tự động đồng bộ
nhãn phân loại của khách hàng đó sang phân hệ Omni-Inbox.
● Kích hoạt kịch bản chốt sales tự động: Chuyển trạng thái thẻ khách hàng sang nhãn
"Sắp chốt HD" có thể được thiết lập để tự động gửi liên kết hợp đồng điện tử hoặc link
thanh toán hóa đơn đến hòm thư/mạng xã hội của khách hàng.
● Đẩy cảnh báo ưu tiên giờ vàng: Khi một khách hàng thuộc cột "Khách Nóng" gửi tin
nhắn mới vào hệ thống, ERP sẽ tự động đẩy cảnh báo ưu tiên hàng đầu bên
Omni-Inbox để nhân viên sales nhảy vào chat ngay lập tức, đảm bảo không bỏ lỡ thời
điểm chốt đơn tốt nhất.
● Chăm sóc lại để Up-sell: Quản lý bám sát cột "Khách Lạnh" để lọc ra các tệp khách
hàng cũ, lập lịch gửi các chiến dịch email/tin nhắn tương tác lại, giới thiệu thêm giá trị gia
tăng để thực hiện up-sell thành công.

-- 32 of 35 --

2. Omni-Inbox (Phân hệ Sales CRM)
Mục tiêu / Vai trò chính
Omni-Inbox hoạt động như một trung tâm giao tiếp đa kênh hợp nhất kết hợp trợ lý AI thông
minh. Tab này gom toàn bộ tin nhắn từ Facebook, Zalo, Website, Hotline... về một nơi duy nhất
và sử dụng AI để tự động trả lời, phân loại tệp khách hàng, thu thập thông tin đơn hàng và chăm
sóc lại sau mua một cách có hệ thống.
Nỗi đau giải quyết (Pain point matching)
● Chậm trễ phản hồi và trôi tin nhắn đa kênh: Khắc phục tình trạng nhân viên phải mở
quá nhiều tab trình duyệt hoặc ứng dụng để trả lời inbox, dẫn đến việc bỏ sót khách
hàng hoặc phản hồi quá muộn.
● Mất khách hàng ngoài giờ làm việc: Đảm bảo mọi tin nhắn phát sinh ngoài khung giờ
hành chính đều được AI phản hồi ngay lập tức, giữ chân khách hàng trước khi họ tìm
sang đối thủ.
● Quá tải vì các câu hỏi lặp đi lặp lại: Giải phóng đội ngũ kinh doanh khỏi các công việc
trả lời FAQ (báo giá, tính năng, tình trạng kho) để tập trung nguồn lực vào các giao dịch
có giá trị cao.
Các thông số / Tính năng hiển thị chính (Bức tranh trực quan)
Giao diện Omni-Inbox được thiết kế tối ưu hóa sự tương tác qua 3 cột chức năng:
1. Hộp thư đa kênh tập trung (Cột bên trái)
● Hiển thị toàn bộ danh sách hội thoại từ các nền tảng khác nhau đổ về với số lượng tin
nhắn mới hiển thị trực quan (Ví dụ: báo đỏ "12 Mới").
● Tự động hiển thị nhãn nhận diện phân khúc khách hàng (Ví dụ: tag "Khách VIP") để
nhân viên biết rõ mức độ quan trọng của khách hàng đang nhắn tin.
2. Khung trò chuyện thông minh (Cột ở giữa)
● Khu vực tương tác thời gian thực với đầy đủ thông tin trạng thái trực tuyến của khách
hàng.
● Các câu trả lời tự động của trợ lý được gắn nhãn nhận diện "AI Trợ lý đã trả lời" kèm
biểu tượng robot để phân biệt rõ ràng với nội dung do nhân viên viết.
3. Bảng điều khiển cấu hình AI Trợ lý (Cột bên phải)

-- 33 of 35 --

Hệ thống cho phép bật/tắt và thiết lập linh hoạt các cơ chế tự động hóa quy trình bán hàng:
● Tự động phân loại khách: AI tự động phân tích ngữ cảnh trò chuyện để gắn thẻ VIP,
Nóng, Ấm, Lạnh cho khách hàng.
● Tự động chốt đơn: Quy trình tự động thu thập thông tin và chốt giao dịch khi khách
đồng ý mua.
● Tự động xin feedback: Thiết lập gửi tin nhắn chăm sóc tự động sau 3 ngày hoàn thành
đơn hàng.
● Thanh trượt điều chỉnh thời gian trễ: Cho phép cấu hình độ trễ phản hồi của AI (Ví dụ:
thiết lập trễ 15 giây).
Hành động tiếp theo (Liên kết vận hành / Call to action)
Hộp thư thông minh Omni-Inbox liên kết chặt chẽ với các phòng ban và quy trình ERP để tối ưu
hóa năng lực bán hàng:
● Đồng bộ tự động với Phễu Khách hàng: Khi trợ lý AI tự động nhận diện ngữ cảnh và
gắn thẻ phân loại (Nóng, Ấm, Lạnh), hệ thống sẽ tự động tạo thẻ tiềm năng mới hoặc
tự động di chuyển vị trí của khách hàng đó sang cột tương ứng trên Phễu Khách
hàng mà sales không cần thao tác tay.
● Tự động hóa quy trình chốt sales: Khi khách hàng đồng ý mua trong chat, tính năng
"Tự động chốt đơn" sẽ tự động xin các thông tin cần thiết của khách (họ tên, địa chỉ, số
điện thoại) và tổng hợp lại thành một bảng dữ liệu cấu trúc (dạng excel/google sheet),
đồng thời gửi thông báo cho nhân viên sales để kiểm tra và xác nhận lại trước khi lên
đơn xuất kho.
● Tương tác lại để Up-sell từ Feedback tốt: Sau 3 ngày, tính năng "Tự động xin
feedback" sẽ kích hoạt để lấy đánh giá từ khách. Việc bám sát ngay sau đơn hàng hiện
tại giúp doanh nghiệp duy trì tương tác liên tục. Khi khách hàng có phản hồi tốt, họ đang
ở trong trạng thái tin tưởng cao nhất vào sản phẩm và công ty, đây chính là thời điểm
vàng để nhân viên sales chủ động giới thiệu thêm các giải pháp gia tăng để thực hiện
up-sell/cross-sell.
● Tối ưu hóa độ trễ để giữ chân khách hàng: Người quản lý điều chỉnh thanh trượt độ
trễ (Ví dụ: 15 giây) để tạo cảm giác tự nhiên như người thật đang gõ phím tư vấn thay vì
bot trả lời ngay lập tức gây cảm giác máy móc. Khoảng trễ này cũng tạo ra một khoảng
thời gian đệm để nhân viên sales thực tế có thể đọc và chủ động can thiệp vào khung
chat nếu phát hiện đây là một thương vụ lớn cần thương lượng sâu.
● Mô hình cộng tác Lai (AI + Con người) mượt mà: AI đóng vai trò làm bộ lọc tiền
phương để trực chat 24/7 và giải quyết các câu hỏi cơ bản, nhưng nhân viên sales có

-- 34 of 35 --

thể tiếp quản cuộc trò chuyện bất cứ lúc nào trực tiếp trên cùng một khung chat mà
không làm gián đoạn trải nghiệm của khách hàng.

-- 35 of 35 --



